Title: HERO: Hindsight-Enhanced Reflection from Environment Observations for Agentic Self-Distillation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11559v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:24:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
## HERO: Hindsight-Enhanced Reflection from Environment Observations for Agentic Self-Distillation 

Haoran Liu 1 ∗, Yuwei Zhang 1 ∗, Xiyao Li 2, Bohan Lyu 3, Jingbo Shang 1 †

> 1

University of California, San Diego 2 Independent Researcher 3 University of California, Berkeley  

> ∗Equal contribution.
> †Correspondence: jshang@ucsd.edu

Abstract 

Reinforcement learning typically improves multi-turn agent capabilities through the ter-minal outcome of the trajectories, which makes it difficult to determine credit assignments for each intermediate turns. Recent on-policy self-distillation methods offer a promising alter-native by converting privileged feedback into dense token-level supervision through a self-teacher. Our study is motivated by the un-expected performance degradation observed when naively extending this paradigm to multi-turn settings, which we attribute to a lack of alignment between privileged feedback, such as successful trajectories or terminal outcomes, and the student’s current decision context. We introduce HERO, a hindsight-enhanced self-distillation framework that uses next environ-ment observations as locally aligned feedback. After each rollout, HERO reflects on the com-pleted interaction to convert each observation into a compact turn-level diagnosis, that cap-tures actionable feedback about the original action such as its necessity, validity or failure cause. On TauBench and WebShop, HERO improves task success and reduces unneces-sary turns over environment-feedback-only self-distillation and GRPO. It is especially effective under limited training turn budgets, where suc-cessful rollouts are rare and GRPO provides weak reward-contrast signals. 

1 Introduction 

While Large Language Model (LLM) agents ex-cel at multi-turn tool use, optimizing their inter-action policies post-training remains challenging. When task outcomes can be scored by automatic verifiers or dedicated judge models, reinforcement learning (RL) methods such as PPO and GRPO provide a natural post-training framework (Schul-man et al., 2017; Shao et al., 2024). However, these outcome-based methods often suffer from severe data-efficiency issues due to pathological credit assignment on the intermediate tool-call. 5 8 10 12 15 20 

> Training Max-Turn Budget
> 0.26
> 0.28
> 0.30
> 0.32
> 0.34
> 0.36
> Validation Success Rate
> train budget < test budget
> HERO(ours)
> GRPO

Figure 1: HERO remains trainable under strict turn budgets. Shaded region: training budget < test bud-get (15). GRPO receives weak reward variation when successful rollouts are rare; HERO still improves by learning from failed trajectories. 

The issue is further amplified in long-horizon agent interactions, where successful rollouts are often rare because agents must reason over evolv-ing observations and reach delayed outcomes under limited interaction budgets. As shown in Figure 1, we vary the training max-turn budget and evalu-ate the resulting validation success rate under the same test-time setting. When the interaction bud-get is small, most rollouts fail before reaching a successful terminal state, causing group-relative RL methods such as GRPO to receive little reward contrast across sampled trajectories. Consequently, the resulting advantages provide weak supervision signals that offer little guidance on local decisions. Moreover, even when an agent eventually succeeds, the outcome reward may still reinforce trajectories with redundant tool calls. These errors are easy to recognize in hindsight, but difficult to correct from scalar reward values. A natural alternative is to convert outcome infor-mation into denser token-level supervision through on-policy self-distillation. Methods such as SDPO and OPSD condition a teacher on privileged feed-back, such as task outcomes or successful demon-strations, and then distill the resulting distribution 

> arXiv:2606.11559v1 [cs.AI] 10 Jun 2026

back into the original policy (Hübotter et al., 2026; Zhao et al., 2026; Shenfeld et al., 2026). Such a strategy is shown to be especially effective on single-turn settings such as competitive coding where rich textual feedback is accessible (Zhang et al., 2026). Interestingly, we find that a naive extension of SDPO degrades performance in multi-turn agent tasks. The key issue is that conditioning the teacher on a complete off-policy successful trajectory mis-aligns the teacher’s privileged context with the stu-dent’s local decision context. This observation sug-gests that the central question is not simply how to make feedback denser, but how to make it locally aligned with what the student actually observes and acts upon. We argue that in multi-turn interaction, the most readily available local feedback signal is the next environment observation returned after each action. Unlike terminal rewards or success-ful demonstrations, this observation immediately follows the student’s action, and reflects how the environment responds to the agent’s actual behav-ior. This motivates the central question of this work: how can we best leverage next observations as locally aligned feedback for multi-turn agent training? In this paper, we propose HERO: Hindsight E nhanced Reflection from Environment Observations for agentic self-distillation. After each rollout, HERO uses the completed interaction to interpret the next observation at each turn and converts it into a compact turn-level diagnosis. This diagnosis summarizes the relevant hindsight evidence for the current decision, while avoiding direct conditioning on a complete off-policy successful trajectory. A self-teacher is then conditioned on the student’s original decision context, the next environment observation, and the corresponding hindsight reflection, and re-evaluates the student’s original action tokens. In this way, HERO turns naturally available interaction feedback into dense token-level supervision that is both informative and locally aligned with the student’s on-policy behavior. Our contributions are: 

• We identify that in multi-turn agent tasks, condi-tioning on off-policy successful trajectories cre-ates a mismatch with the student’s local decision and causes degraded performance. 

• We argue that the most readily available local feedback signal is the next environment observa-tion returned after each action. 

• We propose HERO, an observation-grounded hindsight self-distillation framework that inter-prets next observations through compact turn-level reflections and conditions a self-teacher on the student’s original decision context to produce dense token-level supervision. 

• We empirically show that HERO improves suc-cess rate and execution efficiency on TauBench and WebShop, learns from failed or partial tra-jectories without successful demonstrations, and remains effective under limited training turn bud-gets where GRPO receives weak reward-contrast signals. 

2 Preliminaries 

2.1 Problem Formulation: Multi-turn Agentic RL 

We consider a multi-turn tool-use environment. Given an initial task x, the agent interacts with the environment for at most T turns. At turn t, the policy observes the history 

Ht = ( x, y 1, o 1, . . . , y t−1, o t−1),

where yi is the assistant action, oi is the environ-ment observation. The student policy samples 

yt ∼ πθ(· | Ht). A complete trajectory is 

τ = ( x, y 1, o 1, . . . , y T , o T ),

2.2 On-policy Self-Distillation 

On-policy distillation trains a student on its own generated contexts (Agarwal et al., 2024; Lu and Lab, 2025). Given an input x, the student samples 

y = ( y1, . . . , y T ) ∼ πθ(· | x).

At decoding step t, the student distribution is 

pt = πθ(· | x, y <t ).

A teacher provides a target distribution qt, and the student is optimized to match it, 

LOPD (θ) = Ex,y ∼πθ

" TX

> t=1

D(pt, q t)

#

.

where D(·, ·) is a distributional distance, such as KL divergence or Jensen–Shannon divergence. Self-distillation removes the need for a separate expert teacher by instantiating the teacher from the same policy under a privileged context c(x, y ) (e.g., Shared on-policy rollout  

> Both methods train on the same trajectory and the same original action tokens.
> User task
> "I want to return items I purchased."
> Selected turn t: original action y t
> fi nd_user_id_by_name_zip("John", "Doe", "12345")
> Local observation o t
> Error: user not found
> Later evidence
> future turns and fi nal outcome R(τ)

Vanilla full-demo teacher  

> Naive multi-turn extension of single-turn privileged distillation
> Teacher context
> Ht+ R(τ) + τ*
> complete successful trajectory is visible at every turn

× Context mismatch 

> future actions and outcomes are unavailable to the student at early turns
> Teacher signal on y t
> may rely on non-causal shortcuts, giving weak or misleading token-level supervision

HERO (ours)   

> Re fl ection compresses future evidence into a local hint
> Re fl ector
> sees the full trajectory τ and outcome R(τ) outputs a compact turn-level hint h t
> Teacher context
> Ht+ R(τ)+ o t+ h t
> compact hindsight, no raw future trajectory

✓ Targeted local credit 

> the hint summarizes only the relevant hindsight for this turn
> Teacher signal on y t
> re-evaluates the same original action tokens with more actionable turn-level supervision

Figure 2: HERO compresses hindsight into turn-level privileged context. Full-demo self-distillation gives the teacher a complete successful trajectory at every turn, creating teacher–student context mismatch in early decisions. Environment-only feedback is local and often ambiguous. HERO first reflects over the completed rollout to extract a compact hint ht, then conditions the self-teacher on Ht, ot, R(τ ), and ht to produce targeted token-level supervision on the student’s original action tokens. 

environment feedback or a successful demonstra-tion). The self-teacher distribution is 

qt = sg [ π¯θ(· | x, y <t , c (x, y ))] ,

where sg[ ·] stops gradients through the teacher side, and ¯θ can be the current model, a delayed copy, or an EMA teacher. This converts privileged feedback into dense token-level supervision while keeping the student on-policy. 

LSelf -OPD (θ) = Ex,y ∼πθ

h TX

t=1 

D



πθ(· | x, y <t ),

sg[ π¯θ(· | x, y <t , c (x, y ))] 

i 

.

2.3 Jensen–Shannon Divergence 

The symmetric Jensen-Shannon divergence is a commonly used distributional distance. Given the student distribution pt and the self-teacher distribu-tion qt, define their mixture 

mt = 12 (pt + qt).

The Jensen–Shannon divergence is 

DJSD (pt, q t) = 12 DKL (pt∥mt) + 12 DKL (qt∥mt),

where 

DKL (p∥q) = X

v∈V 

p(v) log p(v)

q(v) .

3 Method 

We propose HERO, Hindsight-Enhanced 

Reflection from Environment Observations, an observation-grounded self-distillation framework for multi-turn tool-use agents. HERO transforms each on-policy rollout into token-level supervision through three stages. First, the student policy generates a multi-turn trajectory under the standard causal interaction history. Second, after the rollout terminates, a reflector inspects the full trajectory and produces structured turn-level hints that diagnose local decision errors. Third, a self-teacher is conditioned on each turn-level hint and re-evaluates the student’s original action tokens, producing dense distributional supervision for the student policy. Figure 2 gives an overview of HERO and contrasts it with the naive full-demo teacher. 

3.1 Hindsight-Enhanced Reflection from Observations 

After the rollout finishes, HERO invokes a reflector 

R that produces structured turn-level reflections: 

h1: T = R(x, τ, R (τ )) .

Each reflection is written abstractly as 

ht = ( dt, ˆat),

where dt is a natural-language diagnosis and ˆat is an optional corrected local action or target behavior. User:    

> {{original_task_prompt}}
> The following is feedback from your unsuccessful earlier attempt:
> Trajectory outcome: -trajectory_success: {{trajectory_success}} - final_reward: {{final_reward}} Environment feedback or tool observation: {{environment_output}} Reflection diagnosis: {{reflection_hint}}
> Use the critique/hint to produce the corrected assistant action for the current scored turn.
> Assistant: {{original_response}}

Figure 3: Teacher prompt template with trajectory out-come, environment feedback, and reflection diagnosis. 

When the reflector finds no actionable signal for turn t, we set ht = ∅. In our JSON implementa-tion, the optional confidence field is treated only as textual metadata that helps the self-teacher in-terpret the reflection; it is not used as a numerical weight, filtering criterion, or optimization target. Although R sees the full trajectory, the self-teacher later receives only the local hint ht, not the raw future, so hindsight is compressed into a per-turn privileged signal. 

3.2 Turn-level Privileged Self-Teacher 

HERO uses the current policy in two roles. The 

student generates the original trajectory under the causal interaction history, while the self-teacher re-evaluates the same action tokens under a hindsight-augmented context. A straightforward way to construct privileged context is to provide the teacher with the raw future trajectory after turn t,

τ>t = ( yt+1 , o t+1 , . . . , y T , o T ).

The future trajectory contains delayed conse-quences of the current action. However, it provides an indirect credit-assignment signal. Since it can be long and noisy, the teacher may struggle to iden-tify the earlier decision responsible for the eventual failure. It may also introduce a larger mismatch be-tween the teacher context and the student’s causal decision context. HERO therefore first converts the full trajectory into a compact turn-level hint ht,which summarizes the relevant hindsight informa-tion for the current decision. For turn t, we build a hindsight-augmented teacher context 

eHt = P x, r <t , o t, R (τ ), h t

,

where P is the fixed prompt template shown in Figure 3. Crucially, eHt contains only the lo-cal hint ht, not the raw future trajectory. Let the assistant response at turn t be tokenized as 

yt = ( yt, 1, . . . , y t, |yt|). At token position k, the stu-dent and (stop-gradient) self-teacher distributions are pstu  

> t,k

= πθ(· | Ht, y t,<k ),ptea  

> t,k

= sg  π¯θ(· | eHt, y t,<k ) .

We optimize the HERO objective by applying the self-distillation loss to the selected assistant turns. Let I(τ ) denote the set of assistant turns for which the reflection hint is successfully parsed and non-empty. Following the definition of DJSD in §2.3, the objective is 

LHERO (θ) = Eτ ∼πθ

 1

|I (τ )|

X 

> t∈I (τ)

ℓt

 ,ℓt = 1

|yt|

> |yt|

X

> k=1

DJSD 

 pstu  

> t,k

, p tea 

> t,k

 .

(1) 

Remark: Learning from Failed Trajectories Akey advantage of HERO is that it can learn even when no successful rollout is available. In GRPO-style training, the group-relative advantage is 

AGRPO  

> i

= R(τi) − 1

> G

PGj=1 R(τj ).

When all G rollouts in a group fail, R(τi) = 0 

for every i and AGRPO  

> i

= 0 , so GRPO receives no learning signal. In contrast, HERO can still obtain non-zero supervision through Eq. (1) when-ever ht̸ = ∅ for some turn t. Failed trajectories therefore still teach the model to correct local ex-ecution errors — using concise tool-call formats, avoiding redundant API calls, or adhering to the required action schema. 

4 Experiment 

4.1 Experiment Setup Datasets and Models. We evaluate HERO on multi-turn agentic tasks that require tool use and sequential decision making. Our main benchmarks are Tau-Bench Retail and WebShop (Yao et al., 2022a, 2024), cover-ing structured API use for customer-service tasks and web-based multi-step shopping, respec-tively. We train on the retail domain and ad-ditionally evaluate on TauBench Airline as an out-of-distribution (OOD) domain to test cross-domain generalization. All methods are trained and evaluated on Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 and Table 1: Main results on multi-turn agent benchmarks. We report success rate (SR, ↑) and average number of turns / tool calls (Turns, ↓). TauBench-Airline is treated as an out-of-distribution benchmark.                                                                            

> Model Method TauBench-Retail TauBench-Airline WebShop SR ↑Turns ↓SR ↑Turns ↓SR ↑Turns ↓
> Qwen3-4B-Instruct Base 27.2 10.5 12.0 13.1 21.8 8.6 Environment Feedback Only 30.4 11.5 12.5 13.7 37.5 10.4 Full-Demo Privileged Teacher 22.5 12.4 8.5 13.9 17.4 10.6 GRPO 33.3 13.4 18.0 14.0 65.2 8.1
> HERO (ours) 34.7 9.6 19.5 10.1 68.9 8.1
> Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct Base 33.6 11.9 30.0 12.3 32.7 8.5 Environment Feedback Only 34.5 12.2 32.0 12.6 44.3 9.3 Full-Demo Privileged Teacher 26.1 12.6 26.0 13.4 25.9 9.9 GRPO 47.8 10.8 33.5 11.6 76.1 7.3 HERO (ours) 50.3 10.7 35.5 11.2 79.6 7.0

Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 under the same ReAct-style tool-use interface (Yang et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2022b). 

Settings. For HERO, we use the generalized Jensen–Shannon divergence as the self-distillation objective with α = 0 .5. We apply a lower clip-ping threshold ϵmin = 0 .4 and an upper clipping threshold ϵmax = 10 . The training batch size is 16. Further implementation details, including prompt templates, reflection format, optimization hyperpa-rameters, and decoding settings, are provided in Appendix A. 

Baselines and metrics. We compare against four baselines: (i) Base , the instruction-tuned model without additional training; (ii) Environ-ment Feedback Only , which conditions the self-teacher only on raw environment feedback or tool observations; (iii) Full-Demo Privileged Teacher ,which naively extends single-turn privileged self-distillation to multi-turn agents by giving the self-teacher the complete successful trajectory or cor-rected demonstration at every turn; and (iv) GRPO ,which optimizes scalar outcome rewards with group-relative advantages. The Full-Demo Priv-ileged Teacher baseline is designed to test whether full future-trajectory exposure is a sufficient privi-leged signal, or whether it instead creates teacher– student context mismatch in early turns. We report mean@4 success rate and the average number of turns. Higher success and lower turn count indicate better and more efficient agents. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 1 summarizes the main results across two model scales and three multi-turn agent bench-marks. Overall, HERO consistently improves suc-cess rate over the base model and the environment-feedback-only self-distillation baseline across all settings. Compared with GRPO, HERO achieves higher success rates in every benchmark while us-ing comparable or fewer turns, suggesting that hind-sight reflection improves not only task completion but also the efficiency of multi-turn execution. For Qwen3-4B-Instruct, HERO improves over GRPO from 33.3% to 34.7% on TauBench-Retail, from 18.0% to 19.5% on the out-of-distribution TauBench-Airline benchmark, and from 65.2% to 68.9% on WebShop. The improvement is particularly notable in terms of execution length on TauBench, where HERO reduces the average number of turns from 13.4 to 9.6 on Retail and from 14.0 to 10.1 on Airline. This indicates that reflection-augmented supervision helps the agent avoid unnecessary or repeated tool calls, especially in long-horizon tool-use environments. The gains are also consistent for Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct. HERO improves over GRPO by 2.5 points on TauBench-Retail, 2.0 point on TauBench-Airline, and 3.5 points on WebShop, while slightly reducing the average number of turns in all three benchmarks. These results suggest that stronger models can better benefit from hindsight reflection, likely because they generate more accurate diagnos-tic hints and follow reflection-conditioned teacher signals more reliably. 

Why not directly use full successful trajecto-ries? Existing self-distillation methods such as SDPO (Hübotter et al., 2026) and OPSD (Zhao et al., 2026) are primarily designed for single-turn settings, where the privileged context is naturally aligned with the current decision. In multi-turn agent tasks, however, there is no canonical way to extend such methods, because the teacher may condition on information that is unavailable to the student at early turns. We therefore evaluate a natu-ral but naive extension, where the teacher prompt is augmented with the complete successful tra-jectory or corrected demonstration for all turns. This variant performs worse than the base model / environment-feedback baseline. We attribute this degradation to teacher–student context mismatch. At early turns, the teacher has access to future ac-tions and outcomes that are unavailable to the stu-dent. Its distribution may therefore depend on non-causal shortcuts rather than local decision evidence. This can spread credit over the full demonstration and produce misleading token-level supervision on the original action tokens. 

4.3 Ablation on Teacher Prompt 

We study which teacher-prompt components con-tribute to HERO. Table 2 compares raw environ-ment feedback, reflection-only feedback, the full HERO prompt, and an external-reflector variant. The results show that reflection provides more actionable supervision than raw environment feed-back. Raw tool observations are often local and underspecified. They describe the immediate out-come of an action, but not always the reason the action was suboptimal. Hindsight reflection in-stead converts delayed consequences into direct turn-level corrections. This helps the self-teacher identify redundant, malformed, over-specified, or unsupported tool calls.             

> Table 2: Ablation on the self-teacher prompt. Reflection provides more actionable supervision than raw environ-ment feedback and remains useful without successful demonstrations. We report success rate ( ↑) and average turns ( ↓).
> Teacher Prompt Variant Success ↑Turns ↓
> Raw env feedback only 30.4 11.5 Reflection only 33.9 10.1 HERO 34.7 9.6 Reflection with external reflector 35.7 9.4

We also compare self-reflection with an external reflector implemented using GPT-4o (Hurst et al., 2024). The external reflector yields slightly better performance, suggesting that higher-quality reflec-tions can further improve HERO. However, the gap between self-reflection and GPT-4o reflection is modest. This supports our hypothesis that many bottlenecks in agentic tool-use tasks are not com-plex reasoning failures, but local execution and instruction-following errors, such as tool-call for-mat, argument selection, and repeated action pat-terns. Although the policy may make these mis-takes during rollout, it can often diagnose them in hindsight and convert them into useful self-distillation signals. Notably, HERO remains effective even without successful demonstrations. This indicates that the method is not merely imitating successful rollouts; it can also learn from failed or partial trajectories by diagnosing local execution errors. This prop-erty is important under strict turn budgets, where successful trajectories are rare and outcome-reward RL receives little learning signal. 

4.4 General Capability Retention 

We further evaluate whether agent post-training degrades general capabilities. We test the final checkpoints on MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020), MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024), and IFEval (Zhou et al., 2023), which measure broad knowledge, chal-lenging reasoning, and instruction following. For IFEval, we report prompt-level strict accuracy in the main table, as it is the most conservative metric; full IFEval results are provided in Appendix D. As shown in Table 3, both GRPO and HERO show no noticeable degradation on these benchmarks. This suggests that on-policy agent training can im-prove tool-use behavior without broadly damaging general knowledge or instruction-following ability.             

> Table 3: General capability retention after TauBench-Retail training. Both GRPO and HERO show no notice-able degradation on MMLU, MMLU-Pro and IFEval, while HERO achieves stronger agentic performance and efficiency in Table 1.
> Method MMLU MMLU-Pro IFEval Base 59.60 34.38 82.62 GRPO 59.61 34.25 82.19 HERO 59.54 34.35 82.80

4.5 Learning Beyond Sparse Outcome Rewards 

HERO provides useful learning signal in regimes where outcome-reward RL is weak. 

Strict turn budgets. GRPO relies on reward vari-ation within a rollout group. Under small turn budgets, most rollouts fail with reward 0, caus-ing group-relative advantages to collapse. HERO does not require successful rollouts. Failed trajec-tories can still produce reflection hints, which pro-vide non-zero token-level supervision. Therefore, HERO can improve even when GRPO receives little useful gradient signal. 

Single-rollout learning. GRPO also requires multiple rollouts per task to estimate group-relative advantages. With G = 1 , its advantage is identi-cally zero. HERO remains well-defined because its supervision comes from a reflection-conditioned self-teacher rather than reward contrast. Figure 4 shows that HERO with G = 1 recovers most of the improvement of G = 4 , despite higher vari-ance. This reduces environment interaction cost, which is important for long trajectories, real APIs, or high-latency simulators. 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 

> Training Step
> 0.26
> 0.28
> 0.30
> 0.32
> 0.34
> 0.36
> 0.38
> Validation Success Rate
> Ours, rollout=1
> Ours, rollout=4

Figure 4: HERO remains trainable with a single rollout per task. Validation success rate on TauBench-Retail with G = 4 vs. G = 1 ; dashed line is base performance. GRPO is undefined when G = 1 , since group-relative advantages collapse to zero. 

Wall-clock efficiency. Although HERO intro-duces per-trajectory overhead from the reflection step and the teacher forward pass, it requires only 

G = 1 rollout per task while GRPO needs G = 8 

to obtain non-zero group-relative advantages. The net effect is that HERO reaches comparable or bet-ter validation performance at lower total training cost; we report wall-clock curves in Appendix B. 

4.6 Case Study: Reflection Sharpens Credit at the Forking Point 

Figure 5 visualizes the actual per-token teacher JSD loss computed from a training trajectory, com-paring the two teacher prompt variants on iden-tical student tokens. The agent fabricates iden-tity information, e.g., John Doe and 12345 , and calls find_user_id_by_name_zip instead of ask-ing the user for real authentication information. The raw environment feedback only returns user not found , which is too ambiguous to identify the true error. HERO resolves this ambiguity through hind-sight reflection. The reflector diagnoses that the agent should not invent user information and should ask for the required name and zip code. This pro-duces a stronger negative signal at the actual action forking point, especially on the incorrect tool call and the fabricated argument tokens. By contrast, the environment-feedback-only teacher mainly re-acts to the local API failure, resulting in weaker and less targeted supervision. 

5 Related Work 

Multi-turn agentic RL. LLM agents solve in-teractive tasks by reasoning over histories and in-voking external tools or APIs (Yao et al., 2022b; Schick et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2024). Benchmarks such as WebShop, tau-bench, and AppWorld eval-uate these agents in multi-step environments with structured actions and delayed outcomes (Yao et al., 2022a, 2024; Trivedi et al., 2024). Outcome-based RL methods, including PPO and GRPO, optimize scalar rewards over complete trajectories (Schul-man et al., 2017; Shao et al., 2024). However, such rewards provide weak credit assignment in multi-turn settings. Successful trajectories may still contain redundant or invalid intermediate ac-tions. Failed trajectories often provide no usable gradient signal. Recent work addresses this issue with hierarchical value learning, structured advan-tages, or process reward models (Zhou et al., 2024; Zhang, 2026; Lightman et al., 2024). These meth-ods usually require auxiliary critics or still reduce feedback to scalar signals. In contrast, HERO uses natural-language reflection to convert trajectory ex-perience into turn-level privileged supervision. 

On-policy distillation and self-distillation. 

Knowledge distillation trains a student to match a stronger teacher’s distribution or representa-tions (Kim and Rush, 2016; Sanh et al., 2019; Ko et al., 2024). However, standard distillation is often off-policy. The student is trained on fixed teacher-or dataset-generated contexts, but deployed on its own generations, leading to exposure bias and possible degradation during continued training (Agarwal et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). On-policy distillation mitigates this mismatch by supervising the student on its own sampled trajectories (Agarwal et al., 2024; Lu User query: "Hi! I’d like to return a couple of items I purchased." API feedback: Error: user not found.                               

> Desired behavior: Ask the user for their real name instead of guessing placeholder identity information.
> Environment feedback only Env-only feedback penalizes the symptom (placeholder "John"),
> spreading weak signal across reasoning tokens but failing at the actual tool-choice fork.
> Thought: User not found with provided email. Need to attempt authentication via name and zip code. Action: {"name": "find_user_id_by_name_zip", "arguments": {"first_name": "John", "last_name": ...
> HERO: environment + reflection With reflection, the teacher redirects penalty to the cause:
> the wrong tool call find_user_id_by_name_zip, while leaving reasoning tokens largely unaffected.
> Reflection hint: Used fabricated name information; ask for real name.
> Thought: User not found with provided email. Need to attempt authentication via name and zip code. Action: {"name": "find_user_id_by_name_zip", "arguments": {"first_name": "John", "last_name": ...

Figure 5: HERO localizes credit to the wrong tool call. Raw environment feedback only reports user not found , yielding weak or diffuse supervision. HERO converts the trajectory into a reflection hint, producing stronger negative signal at the tool-call forking point and on fabricated argument tokens. Red token backgrounds denote per-token teacher JSD loss, with darker red indicating a stronger negative signal. 

and Lab, 2025; Yang et al., 2025; DeepSeek-AI, 2026). Because the objective is defined on the current policy distribution, it can better preserve or recover behaviors during midtraining and post-training (Chen et al., 2025; Shenfeld et al., 2026). Self-distillation further removes the need for an external teacher by reusing the same model under privileged context (Snell et al., 2022). SDPO con-ditions the policy on environment feedback or suc-cessful rollouts and distills the feedback-informed distribution back into the original policy (Hübotter et al., 2026). Related work uses execution feedback, reference solutions, hints, or other privileged infor-mation for self-distillation (Ye et al., 2026; Zhao et al., 2026; Penaloza et al., 2026; Chen et al., 2025; He et al., 2026). We compare directly against the multi-turn extension of this family in Section 4.3. 

Reflection and hindsight feedback. Natural-language reflection has been widely used to im-prove LLM behavior at inference time. Methods such as Reflexion, Self-Refine, and Self-Critique prompt models to critique and revise their own outputs (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023; Saunders et al., 2022). TextGrad treats verbal feed-back as a gradient-like signal for prompt optimiza-tion (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024), while other work uses pre- and post-reflection outputs to construct preference data (Stephan et al., 2024). These meth-ods mainly use reflection to revise outputs, opti-mize prompts, or construct training targets. HERO instead uses reflection as privileged con-text for self-distillation. The reflected diagnosis is not directly imitated as a target. It conditions a self-teacher, which produces token-level distri-butional supervision on the student’s original ac-tion. This is related to Hindsight Experience Re-play (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) and language-model extensions of hindsight learning (Liu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023), but targets a different problem: assigning local credit to action tokens in multi-turn agent trajectories, rather than directly regenerating a corrected response. 

6 Discussion and Conclusion 

We introduced HERO, an observation-grounded hindsight self-distillation framework for multi-turn tool-use agents. Our starting point is that terminal outcome rewards and complete successful demon-strations are often poorly aligned with the student’s local decision context in long-horizon interactions. Instead of conditioning the teacher on a complete off-policy trajectory, HERO addresses this by com-pressing hindsight evidence into compact turn-level diagnoses and using them, together with the stu-dent’s original decision context, as privileged con-text for a self-teacher that produces dense token-level supervision. Our experiments show that HERO improves task success and execution efficiency, especially when successful rollouts are rare and outcome-reward RL provides weak credit-assignment signals. These results suggest that effective self-distillation for multi-turn agents requires feedback that is not only dense, but also locally aligned with the student’s decision context. More broadly, HERO offers a middle ground between external-teacher distillation and pure outcome-reward RL. We see observation-grounded hindsight reflection as a promising direction for multi-turn agents, particularly when successful roll-outs are rare, interaction costs are high, or raw feedback is ambiguous. Limitations 

HERO has several limitations. First, HERO relies on the model’s own ability to reflect on its trajec-tories. This makes it most effective for agentic errors that are recognizable in hindsight, such as malformed tool calls, over-specified arguments, re-peated API calls, or incorrect interaction patterns. These errors are common in tool-use agents, but the same mechanism may not be sufficient for tasks dominated by complex mathematical reasoning or deep multi-step problem solving, where the model may be unable to diagnose the underlying mistake by itself. Second, HERO depends on the model’s instruction-following and in-context learning abili-ties. The self-teacher must correctly interpret the reflection hint and translate it into token-level pref-erence changes. As a result, HERO is better suited to instruction-tuned models than base models. In our experiments, larger and stronger instruct mod-els benefit more from HERO, likely because they produce better reflections and follow hindsight-conditioned prompts more reliably. 

References 

Rishabh Agarwal, Nino Vieillard, Yongchao Zhou, Pi-otr Stanczyk, Sabela Ramos Garea, Matthieu Geist, and Olivier Bachem. 2024. On-policy distillation of language models: Learning from self-generated mistakes. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 21246–21263. Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-Grew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Woj-ciech Zaremba. 2017. Hindsight experience replay. 

Advances in neural information processing systems ,30. Howard Chen, Noam Razin, Karthik Narasimhan, and Danqi Chen. 2025. Retaining by doing: The role of on-policy data in mitigating forgetting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.18874 .Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. 2024. Self-play fine-tuning con-verts weak language models to strong language mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335 .DeepSeek-AI. 2026. Deepseek-v4: Towards highly efficient million-token context intelligence. Yinghui He, Simran Kaur, Adithya Bhaskar, Yongjin Yang, Jiarui Liu, Narutatsu Ri, Liam Fowl, Ab-hishek Panigrahi, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev Arora. 2026. Self-distillation zero: Self-revision turns bi-nary rewards into dense supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.12002 .Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2020. Measuring massive multitask language under-standing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300 .Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, and 1 others. 2024. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 .Jonas Hübotter, Frederike Lübeck, Lejs Behric, An-ton Baumann, Marco Bagatella, Daniel Marta, Ido Hakimi, Idan Shenfeld, Thomas Kleine Buening, Car-los Guestrin, and Andreas Krause. 2026. Reinforce-ment learning via self-distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20802 .Yoon Kim and Alexander M Rush. 2016. Sequence-level knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the 2016 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 1317–1327. Jongwoo Ko, Sungnyun Kim, Tianyi Chen, and Se-Young Yun. 2024. Distillm: Towards streamlined distillation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03898 .Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harri-son Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2024. Let’s verify step by step. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 39578–39601. Hao Liu, Carmelo Sferrazza, and Pieter Abbeel. 2024. Chain of hindsight aligns language models with feed-back. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , volume 2024, pages 41395–41414. Kevin Lu and Thinking Machines Lab. 2025. On-policy distillation. Thinking Machines Lab: Con-nectionism . Https://thinkingmachines.ai/blog/on-policy-distillation. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, and 1 others. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:46534–46594. Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. 2024. Gorilla: Large language model connected with massive apis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:126544–126565. Emiliano Penaloza, Dheeraj Vattikonda, Nicolas Gon-tier, Alexandre Lacoste, Laurent Charlin, and Mas-simo Caccia. 2026. Privileged information dis-tillation for language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.04942 .Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. 2019. Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108 .William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills, Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan Leike. 2022. Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05802 .Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in neural information process-ing systems , 36:68539–68551. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proxi-mal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, and 1 others. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Idan Shenfeld, Mehul Damani, Jonas Hübotter, and Pulkit Agrawal. 2026. Self-distillation enables con-tinual learning. Preprint , arXiv:2601.19897. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:8634–8652. Charlie Snell, Dan Klein, and Ruiqi Zhong. 2022. Learning by distilling context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15189 .Moritz Stephan, Alexander Khazatsky, Eric Mitchell, Annie S Chen, Sheryl Hsu, Archit Sharma, and Chelsea Finn. 2024. Rlvf: Learning from verbal feedback without overgeneralization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10893 .Harsh Trivedi, Tushar Khot, Mareike Hartmann, Ruskin Manku, Vinty Dong, Edward Li, Shashank Gupta, Ashish Sabharwal, and Niranjan Balasubramanian. 2024. Appworld: A controllable world of apps and people for benchmarking interactive coding agents. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 16022–16076. Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, and 1 others. 2024. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:95266–95290. Shusheng Xu, Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Wenjie Ye, Weilin Liu, Zhiyu Mei, Guangju Wang, Chao Yu, and Yi Wu. 2024. Is dpo superior to ppo for llm align-ment? a comprehensive study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10719 .An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2022a. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:20744–20757. Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. τ -bench: A benchmark for Tool-Agent-User interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .Tianzhu Ye, Li Dong, Xun Wu, Shaohan Huang, and Furu Wei. 2026. On-policy context distillation for language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12275 .Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. 2024. Textgrad: Automatic" differentiation" via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496 .Chenchen Zhang. 2026. From reasoning to agentic: Credit assignment in reinforcement learning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.09459 .Tianjun Zhang, Fangchen Liu, Justin Wong, Pieter Abbeel, and Joseph E Gonzalez. 2023. The wis-dom of hindsight makes language models better in-struction followers. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 41414–41428. PMLR. Yuwei Zhang, Sha Li, Changlong Yu, Qin Lu, Shuowei Jin, Chengyu Dong, Haoran Liu, Ilgee Hong, Xintong Li, Zhenyu Shi, and 1 others. 2026. Learning with rare success but rich feedback via reflection-enhanced self-distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.12741 .Siyan Zhao, Zhihui Xie, Mengchen Liu, Jing Huang, Guan Pang, Feiyu Chen, and Aditya Grover. 2026. Self-distilled reasoner: On-policy self-distillation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18734 .Jeffrey Zhou, Tianjian Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Sid-dhartha Brahma, Sujoy Basu, Yi Luan, Denny Zhou, and Le Hou. 2023. Instruction-following evalu-ation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07911 .Yifei Zhou, Andrea Zanette, Jiayi Pan, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. 2024. Archer: Training language model agents via hierarchical multi-turn rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19446 .A Implementation Details 

Training setup. We train all models for a single epoch over the training data. Rollouts are generated on-policy during training rather than reused from a fixed offline buffer. For HERO, we use a batch size of 16 prompts and a single rollout per prompt (N = 1 ) in all main experiments. The learning rate is 2 × 10 −7. For validation, we sample four responses per test problem and report mean@4 success rate or task score. 

Hardware. We train Qwen3-4B-Instruct on 2×NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs and Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct on 8 ×NVIDIA H200 GPUs. The same hardware configuration is used for all base-lines (Environment Feedback Only, Full-Demo Privileged Teacher, GRPO) and HERO within each model scale, ensuring that wall-clock comparisons (Appendix B) are made under matched compute budgets. 

Self-distillation objective. HERO uses the gen-eralized Jensen–Shannon divergence with α = 0 .5

as the self-distillation loss. To reduce memory cost, we compute the distillation loss over the top-100 tokens under the student distribution at each po-sition, with a tail bucket for the remaining proba-bility mass. The loss is applied only to assistant-generated tokens and masked out on user prompts, tool observations, and environment feedback. We use an EMA self-teacher with update rate 0.001 .For clipped importance weighting, we use a lower clipping threshold ϵmin = 0 .4 and an upper clip-ping threshold ϵmax = 10 . We set the maximum number of generated tokens per assistant turn to 512 and the maximum prompt length to 8192 to-kens. 

Reflection and teacher prompt. After each roll-out, HERO constructs a reflection prompt from the original task, the full trajectory, tool observa-tions, turn-level rewards, and final outcome. The reflector outputs structured turn-level hints, which are inserted into the teacher prompt for the corre-sponding assistant turn. Unless otherwise stated, the reflector is the policy itself prompted to reflect. In the external-reflector ablation, we use GPT-4o to generate the same structured reflection format. The teacher distribution is always computed by the policy or its EMA copy under the hindsight-conditioned prompt; the reflection itself is used only as privileged context and is not treated as a supervised target.                  

> Learning Rate Validation Success Rate
> 2×10 −732.4
> 5×10 −733.0
> 2×10 −633.3
> 5×10 −631.9
> Table 4: Learning-rate sweep for GRPO on the TauBench-Retail validation split. We select 2×10 −6
> for the main experiments because it achieves the best validation success among the tested learning rates.

GRPO baseline. For GRPO, we use a rollout group size of 8 per prompt and batch size 16. We tune the learning rate separately for GRPO on the TauBench-Retail validation split. As shown in Ta-ble 4, 2 × 10 −6 achieves the best validation success among the tested learning rates, and we therefore use it for the main GRPO baseline. For HERO, we find that 2×10 −7 gives stable op-timization because the reflection-conditioned self-teacher provides dense token-level supervision. In contrast, GRPO receives a much sparser outcome-reward signal and learns slowly with the same learn-ing rate. This choice favors a strong GRPO base-line rather than enforcing identical optimization hyperparameters across objectives with different gradient density and scale. GRPO optimizes scalar outcome rewards with group-relative advantages and does not use self-distillation, hindsight reflection, or an EMA teacher. All baselines use the same ReAct-style interface, tool schema, environment, and evaluation protocol as HERO. 

B Efficiency 

Although HERO introduces additional computa-tion from hindsight reflection and the teacher for-ward pass, it requires only a single rollout per prompt ( G = 1 ). In contrast, GRPO requires a rollout group, and we use G = 8 in our main ex-periments, since group-relative advantages become ineffective when there is no reward variation within the group. Thus, GRPO spends most of its wall-clock time on generating multiple environment tra-jectories, while HERO trades substantially lower wall-clock time per training step for a cheaper re-flection and self-teacher evaluation. Figure 6 reports the per-step training time dur-ing TauBench-Retail training. Despite the extra reflection and distillation overhead, HERO is con-sistently faster than GRPO, taking roughly half the wall-clock time per training step. This is be-1 5 10 15 20 25 31 

> Training Step
> 300
> 400
> 500
> 600
> 700
> Time per Step (s)
> Per-Step Training Time
> HERO (ours)
> GRPO

Figure 6: Per-step wall-clock training time. HERO uses a single rollout per prompt ( G = 1 ) and remains faster than GRPO, which uses G = 8 rollouts per prompt to obtain group-relative advantages. Although HERO adds reflection and teacher-logit computation, the reduced rollout cost dominates the overhead. 

cause HERO obtains a useful learning signal from each individual trajectory, including failed or par-tial ones, whereas GRPO must sample multiple rollouts per task to estimate group-relative advan-tages. As a result, HERO can achieve comparable or better validation performance with lower total training cost. 

C Dataset Details 

We summarize the datasets used in our experiments in Table 5. Our evaluation covers both structured API-based customer-service tasks and web-based shopping tasks. We train on T AU BENCH -R ETAIL 

and W EB SHOP , and use T AU BENCH -A IRLINE 

only as an out-of-distribution transfer benchmark. For TauBench, task success is determined by environment-side database post-conditions, while WebShop provides a continuous reward based on how well the selected product matches the user instruction. 

D Full IFEval Results 

Table 6 reports the complete IFEval results under both strict and loose evaluation at the prompt and instruction levels. We observe no consistent degra-dation after agent post-training. Thus, we interpret these results as evidence of capability retention rather than improvement in general instruction fol-lowing. 

E Reflection Quality Analysis 

To examine whether the reflector produces action-able supervision rather than plausible but incorrect critiques, we manually evaluate a sample of turn-level reflection hints. 

Sampling protocol. We sample N = 150 turn-level hints from TauBench-Retail training rollouts, covering successful, failed, and partial trajectories that reach the turn budget. The sample contains 75 hints from the self-reflector and 75 hints from the GPT-4o reflector. For each sampled turn t, the annotator is shown the trajectory prefix Ht, the student action yt, the subsequent observation ot,and the reflection hint ht, but is blind to the reflector identity. 

Rubric. Each hint is labeled into one of four cat-egories: • Correct : the hint correctly identifies a real execution error or correctly confirms a sound action, and any suggested correction is consis-tent with the tool schema and task state. • Partially correct : the hint identifies a real is-sue but misattributes the cause, assigns blame to an imperfect turn, or proposes a plausible but suboptimal correction. • Incorrect : the hint is factually wrong, violates the tool schema, or references information unavailable at turn t.• Vacuous / non-actionable : the hint is well-formed but provides little usable supervision, e.g., it marks a failed trajectory as correct or identifies an error without suggesting a repair. Labels were assigned by one author following writ-ten guidelines. A second author independently la-beled 30 hints, yielding Cohen’s κ = 0 .87 .

Results. Table 7 reports the label distribution. The self-reflector produces 58 .9% correct and 9.4% 

partially correct hints. The GPT-4o reflector im-proves the correct or partially correct rate from 

68 .3% to 75 .6% , mainly by reducing incorrect hints. The remaining gap comes primarily from two failure modes: causality violations, where the self-reflector references future observations as if they were available at turn t, and multi-turn attri-bution errors, where it blames the most recent turn instead of the earlier forking point. Benchmark Train Test Description TAU BENCH -R ETAIL (Yao et al., 2024) 500 115 Multi-turn customer-service tasks with structured API calls over the re-tail domain, including order lookup, refunds, and exchanges. Task suc-cess is evaluated by binary rewards based on database post-conditions. TAU BENCH -A IRLINE (Yao et al., 2024) – 50 Out-of-distribution evaluation domain with a different tool schema and workflow, covering flight booking, cancellation, and seat changes. We use this split for evaluation only. WEB SHOP (Yao et al., 2022a) 6219 691 Web-based multi-step shopping benchmark. The agent navigates prod-uct pages, selects attributes, and purchases an item matching a natural-language instruction. 

Table 5: Dataset overview. “Train” and “Test” denote the number of unique task instances in each split. We train on TAU BENCH -R ETAIL and W EB SHOP , and use T AU BENCH -A IRLINE only for out-of-distribution evaluation. Table 6: Full IFEval results after agent training. We report both prompt-level and instruction-level accuracy under strict and loose evaluation. 

Method Inst. Loose Inst. Strict Prompt Loose Prompt Strict Base 89.93 88.13 85.40 82.62 GRPO 89.80 88.60 86.70 82.19 HERO 89.68 88.13 86.32 82.80 Label Self-reflector GPT-4o reflector Correct 58.9% 60.3% Partially correct 9.4% 15.3% Incorrect 17.9% 12.0% Vacuous / non-actionable 13.8% 12.4% 

Table 7: Manual evaluation of reflection quality on 150 sampled turn-level hints. 

Discussion. The results explain why self-reflection performs close to GPT-4o reflection in Table 2: most self-generated hints are already cor-rect or at least point to a real issue. Stronger reflec-tors mainly improve the long tail of attribution and causality errors. In practice, even partially correct hints can provide useful learning signal because the self-teacher loss is computed at the token level; as shown in Figure 5, the loss can still concentrate on the wrong tool name or fabricated argument to-kens rather than uniformly penalizing the whole trajectory. 

Failure modes. We observe three recurring fail-ure modes: (i) hindsight leakage , where the reflec-tion uses information only available in later turns; (ii) recency bias , where the reflection attributes fail-ure to the latest turn instead of the true earlier error; and (iii) over-confident corrections , where the hint proposes a plausible but unsupported next action. 

E.1 Qualitative Examples of Reflection Hints 

We further show representative examples from TauBench and WebShop. The examples illustrate both useful reflection behavior and common failure modes. 

TauBench: Correct Hint           

> Outcome. The trajectory succeeds with sequence reward 1.0.
> Hint. All assistant turns are diagnosed as Correct ,with
> next_action_target = null .
> Interpretation. The reflection is consistent with the successful trajectory and does not inject unnecessary corrections.

TauBench: Partially Correct Hint   

> Hint. The reflection says the agent identified an available white wireless-earbuds variant and price difference, but failed to obtain explicit user confirmation before proceeding.
> Interpretation. The hint recognizes real task progress while also identi-fying a missing policy requirement. It gives useful corrective supervision, although the original trajectory is not entirely wrong.

TauBench: Incorrect Hint    

> Hint. The reflection incorrectly marks the current lookup action as reason-able:
> find_user_id_by_name_zip(name, zip)
> After observing Error: user not found , it recommends asking the user for more identity information, such as a phone number or email address, before calling the same type of lookup tool again.
> Interpretation. This hint gives the wrong credit assignment. It treats the failed lookup as an information-collection problem, while the underlying issue is that the user has not placed any valid order. Therefore, additional identity queries would still fail to support the return request. The hint should instead identify the tool-use strategy as unhelpful and guide the agent to verify the existence of a valid purchase or order record.

TauBench: Vacuous / Non-actionable Hint       

> Outcome. The trajectory fails with sequence reward 0.0.
> Hint. Every turn is labeled Correct , and every next_action_target is null.
> Interpretation. The hint provides no explanation for the failed trajectory and no actionable correction, so it cannot provide useful distillation signal.

WebShop: Correct Hint    

> Outcome. The trajectory succeeds with sequence reward 1.0.
> Hint. The reflection marks the search query, product click, attribute selec-tion, and final purchase as aligned with the instruction.
> Interpretation. The hint agrees with both the available actions and the final reward.

WebShop: Partially Correct Hint 

Hint. The reflection says the selected product satisfies the price and product-type constraints, but the agent skipped verification of moisture-wicking and daily-wear requirements. 

Interpretation. The hint captures a partial match: the selected item is plausible, but some important attributes remain unchecked. 

WebShop: Incorrect Hint 

Hint. The reflection proposes click[yellow] as the next action. 

Context. At this turn, click[yellow] is not among the available actions. 

Interpretation. The hint is invalid because WebShop actions must be se-lected from the current clickable set. Training on this hint would encourage an impossible action. 

WebShop: Vacuous / Non-actionable Hint 

Hint. The reflection correctly says that buy now was premature be-cause the selected product did not satisfy the instruction, but gives 

next_action_target = null .

Interpretation. The hint identifies the error but does not provide a repair, making it weak supervision for correcting the failed trajectory. 

F Reflection Prompt 

Figure 7 shows the full reflection prompt used by HERO. After each on-policy rollout, the reflector 

R is invoked once on the full trajectory τ , the tool schema, and the final reward R(τ ), and returns one structured hint ht per assistant turn (Section 3.1). In all main experiments, R is the student policy itself (self-reflection); the ablation in Section 4 additionally evaluates an external LLM reflector (gpt-4o ) to assess the effect of reflector strength. Reflection Prompt 

Role. You are an observation-grounded hindsight critic for a multi-turn tool-use agent. Given the original task, tool schema, full trajectory, and final reward, produce one structured JSON hint for each assistant turn. 

Rules. 

1. Reflect on every assistant turn, including correct turns. 2. Ground each diagnosis in the current action and its next environment observation. Use later trajectory evidence only to identify delayed consequences; do not expose future actions or observations verbatim. 3. Distinguish decision errors from tool-execution errors. 4. Fill next_action_target only when the corrected action is unambiguous; otherwise set it to null with 

"medium" or "low" confidence. 5. Avoid redundant actions, repeated confirmations, and re-asking already confirmed information. 6. Output only valid JSON, with no markdown or extra text. 

Output format. Return a JSON object with one key per assistant turn: "turn1" , "turn2" , . . . , "turnT" .

{"turn1": { "diagnosis": "<brief causal diagnosis>", "confidence": "low", "next_action_target": null }, "turn2": { "diagnosis": "<brief causal diagnosis>", "confidence": "high", "next_action_target": { "thought": "<one-line local plan>", "action": { "name": "<tool_name_or_respond>", "arguments": {"<arg_name>": "<arg_value>"} }}}}

Figure 7: Reflection prompt used by HERO. The reflector produces one structured hint per assistant turn. Each hint is grounded in the current action and its next environment observation, while later trajectory evidence is used only to identify delayed consequences.