Title: Decentralized Multi-Agent Systems with Shared Context

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.10662v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:51:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Decentralized Multi-Agent Systems with Shared Context 

Yuzhen Mao, Azalia Mirhoseini Stanford University 

{yuzhenm,azalia}@stanford.edu 

Abstract 

Multi-agent systems (MAS) can scale large language model reasoning at test time by decomposing complex problems into parallel subtasks. However, most existing MAS rely on centralized orchestration, where a main agent assigns work, collects outputs, and merges results. As the number of subtasks grows, this controller becomes a communication and integration bottleneck. We propose Decentralized Language Models (D ELM), a MAS framework that decentralizes coordination through parallel agents, a shared verified context, and a task queue. Agents asynchronously claim subtasks, read accumulated progress, perform local reasoning, and write back compact verified updates. The shared context acts as a common communication substrate, enabling agents to build on one another’s verified progress without routing every update through a central controller. Empirically, D ELM improves both software-engineering test-time scaling and long-context reasoning. On SWE-bench Verified, D ELM achieves the best performance across Avg.@1, Pass@2, and Pass@4, with gains of up to 10.5 percentage points over the strongest baseline, while reducing cost per task by roughly 50%. On LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA, D ELM achieves the highest average accuracy across four frontier model families, improving over the strongest baseline by up to 5.7 percentage points. The code is available on our project website at https://yuzhenmao.github.io/DeLM/ .

# 1 Introduction avg@1 pass@2 pass@4            

> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> 75
> 80
> Accuracy (%)
> 49.3
> 55.2 54.7
> 65.7
> 57.1
> 64.5 65.6
> 72.9
> 66.3
> 73.2 75.1
> 77.4
> SWE-bench Verified (Base: Gemini-3-Flash)
> Claude Code
> AOrchestra
> mini-SWE-agent
> DeLM
> avg@1 pass@2 pass@4
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> Accuracy (%)
> 53.9 53.0 54.4
> 60.1 59.6 60.3 61.6
> 65.7
> 62.8 63.7
> 65.2
> 68.1
> LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA (Base: GPT-5.4)
> Base
> ReadAgent
> Claude Code
> DeLM

Figure 1: Comparison on SWE-bench Verified and LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA. Our method, DELM, achieves the best average performance across both agentic and long-context benchmarks. Multi-agent systems (MAS) offer a natural way to scale large language model reasoning at test time. Instead of relying on a single model invocation to solve a complex task end-to-end, MAS decompose the problem into subtasks, dispatch multiple agents in parallel, and aggregate their intermediate progress (Anthropic, 2026, Feng et al., 2026, Hong et al., 2023, Kimi et al., 2026, OpenAI, 2025, Ruan et al., 2026, Zhang et al., 2025). This paradigm is increasingly important in two representative settings. The first is test-time scaling, where multiple agents can explore different hypotheses or 1

> arXiv:2606.10662v1 [cs.MA] 9 Jun 2026

Adaptive and Scalable Rigid and Bottlenecked    

> Subtask +
> Subcontext
> Global Context
> Read Write
> Main Agent
> Sub-agents
> ... ...
> ... Returned
> Results ...

Centralized  Decentralized 

# DeLM 

> Parallel Agents
> Task Queue Shared Context

Figure 2: Centralized vs. decentralized multi-agent systems. Centralized MAS relies on a main agent to assign subcontexts, spawn sub-agents, and integrate returned results through a synchronous scatter–gather loop, creating a bottleneck where progress is gated by both the central merge step and the slowest worker. In contrast, D ELM decentralizes coordination through parallel agents, a shared context, and a task queue, allowing agents to exchange progress through shared state, asynchronously claim ready tasks, and scale more adaptively as the number of subtasks grows. pursue alternative reasoning paths in parallel while still sharing intermediate progress. The second is long-context reasoning, such as multi-document question answering, where agents can process different evidence clusters concurrently. In both cases, the value of MAS is not simply to issue more model calls, but to convert additional test-time computation into useful parallel progress. These two settings also capture core challenges in emerging automated research workflows (AlphaEvolve team, 2025, Liu et al., 2026), where agents must both scale exploration across hypotheses and reason over large collections of papers, code, experiments, and intermediate findings. Realizing this potential, however, depends critically on how agents coordinate. Most existing MAS frameworks, including Claude Code Subagents (Anthropic, 2026), Kimi Agent Swarm (Kimi et al., 2026), and AOrchestra (Ruan et al., 2026), rely on centralized orchestration: a main agent decomposes the problem, assigns subtasks and corresponding subcontexts to sub-agents, waits for their outputs, and then integrates the results or launches another round of subtasks, as illustrated in Figure 2 (left). The limitation is that centralized MAS parallelize sub-agent execution, but not the coordination around it. In test-time scaling, the benefit of additional agents depends on whether useful progress can be shared across workers efficiently and faithfully. Centralized orchestration weakens this benefit in two ways. First, it scales poorly: every useful finding, failure, or partial solution must return to the main agent, which then decides how to merge and broadcast that information to other sub-agents. As the number of agents grows, progress sharing becomes a serialized communication bottleneck. Second, during this routing process, the main agent may dilute, omit, or distort useful details, causing important progress to be lost. We provide a more detailed analysis in Section 4.2.1. This bottleneck also arises in long-context reasoning: the main agent must pre-assign evidence clusters to sub-agents, often before knowing which evidence is relevant or how different pieces should be combined (Anthropic, 2026, Zhang et al., 2025). If a sub-agent receives insufficient context, 2it return control to the main agent, triggering additional retrieval or another delegation round. As subtasks or evidence clusters grow, this back-and-forth makes coordination slower, more iterative, and increasingly constrained by a single overloaded main agent. To address these bottlenecks, we propose Decentralized Language Models (D ELM), a MAS frame-work that shifts coordination from a central controller to a shared problem state. As shown in Figure 2 (right), D ELM is built around three core components: parallel agents, a shared context, and a task queue. Rather than routing every interaction through a main agent, agents asynchronously draw tasks from the queue, read accumulated progress from the shared context, perform local reasoning, and write back compact verified updates. This design also differs from peer-to-peer communication, where agents exchange messages directly. Instead, D ELM uses the verified shared context as a common communication substrate: once an update is admitted, it becomes visible to all agents as reusable problem state. As a result, D ELM supports both motivating settings: in test-time scaling, useful findings, failures, and partial solutions can propagate through shared context rather than being repeatedly merged and rebroadcast by a main agent. In long-context reasoning, agents can process different evidence clusters concurrently while maintaining a compact global view of the corpus and accumulated evidence. 

Key idea. Unlike existing MAS, which rely on a central controller and synchronous scatter–gather coordination, D ELM lets agents coordinate asynchronously through a shared, verified context. Agents claim tasks from a queue and write back compact, verified results as they finish, making progress visible to all workers without requiring a main agent to merge, filter, and rebroadcast it. We evaluate D ELM in three settings that stress different forms of multi-agent coordination: (1) software-engineering test-time scaling on SWE-bench Verified (Jimenez et al., 2024), which stresses parallel exploration across different reasoning trajectories; (2) long-context multi-document QA on LongBench-v2 (Bai et al., 2025), which stresses within-task parallelism as agents concurrently inspect different evidence clusters; and (3) aggregation-heavy long-context reasoning on OOLONG (Bertsch et al., 2025), which highlights the complementarity between D ELM’s decentralized verified context and the code-mediated execution of RLM (Zhang et al., 2025). Our key findings are: • DELM converts parallel software-engineering attempts into shared exploration. On SWE-bench Verified (§ 4.2), as shown in Table 1, D ELM achieves the strongest performance across test-time scaling metrics, reaching 77.4% pass@4 while reducing cost to $0.12 per task which is only roughly half of the baselines. Section 4.2.1 further explains these gains through trace-level examples showing how compact shared context helps agents reuse discoveries. • DELM enables iterative shared-state reasoning over long contexts. On LongBench-v2 (§ 4.3), as shown in Table 2, D ELM achieves the highest average accuracy across four frontier models, improving over the best baseline by up to 5.7 percentage points. Section 4.3.1 further shows that both admission-time verification and hierarchical summarization contribute to these gains. • DELM acts as a coordination layer for programmatic reasoning systems. On OOLONG (§ 5), as shown in Table 3, vanilla D ELM underperforms RLM because the benchmark requires exact row-level aggregation, where code-mediated execution is especially useful; however, combining RLM with D ELM yields the best accuracy and lowest cost, showing that D ELM extends beyond conversational agents to code-based reasoning workflows. 32 Motivation and Design Principles 

2.1 From Prompt Routing to Shared State 

Section 1 identifies centralized coordination as a bottleneck in existing MAS. Here, we refine this observation by focusing on its communication mechanism. Centralized MAS are largely prompt-routed: intermediate progress is passed through the main agent, rewritten into subsequent prompts, and selectively exposed to other agents. Thus, parallel execution does not by itself guarantee parallel progress sharing. This perspective motivates a different communication substrate. Instead of repeatedly encoding coordination decisions into prompts, D ELM makes intermediate progress persistent: agents write compact, verified updates into a shared context that later agents can read directly. Coordination therefore becomes state-based, with useful findings, failures, and constraints accumulating as shared problem state rather than passing through a central controller. 

2.2 Compact, Global, Unfoldable Shared Context 

State-based communication is useful only if the shared context remains usable as the problem grows. Sharing raw documents or full agent traces preserves maximal information, but quickly overwhelms each agent’s context window and increases cost. Sharing only compact summaries is cheaper, but risks losing details, qualifications, or cross-document evidence needed for reliable reasoning. DELM addresses this trade-off with an unfolding mechanism. Agents read highly compact gists by default and selectively expand them into detailed summaries or raw evidence when needed. This coarse-to-fine access pattern enables coordination over the full problem while incurring detailed inspection costs only for relevant evidence. 

2.3 Verified Before Admission 

Because the shared context serves as the communication substrate for all agents, errors in this state can propagate widely. Once admitted, an unsupported claim may become reusable problem state, misleading later agents and shaping downstream reasoning. Post-hoc answer checking is insufficient, because such errors may have already influenced intermediate decisions. DELM mitigates this risk through admission-time verification. Before an update is added to the shared context, it is checked against its underlying evidence, including source context and reasoning trajectories. Unsupported or distorted updates are rejected or regenerated, turning the shared context from a raw message buffer into curated shared state. 

# 3 Decentralized Language Models (D ELM) 

DELM implements these design principles through two global structures: a shared context C and a task queue T . Given an input task D and optional source context U , C stores compact, verified gists of accumulated progress, while T stores pending subtasks for parallel execution. As shown in Figure 3 and Algorithm 1, D ELM proceeds in five stages : 1 initialize the task queue from the input , 2 execute ready subtasks in parallel , 3 compress, verify, and admit updates into the shared context , 4 generate additional subtasks when the current shared context is insufficient, and 5 produce the final answer once no further subtasks are needed. We next describe the two core mechanisms underlying this pipeline: Section 3.1 introduces the shared context and task queue, and Section 3.2 describes how intermediate updates are compressed, verified, and admitted. 41

T1

> 2

T2

T3

Task Queue  Parallel Agents  Shared Context 

G3

G2

G1

G

Initialize    

> once
> generate subtasks
> claim read
> queue empty
> more subtasks? no

Answer   

> yes iterate
> 5
> 3compress + verify + admit
> finalize
> 4generate more subtasks

Figure 3: Overview of D ELM. A one-time initialization step decomposes the input into initial subtasks and places them in a shared task queue. Parallel agents asynchronously claim tasks ( Ti), read the verified shared context, and perform local reasoning. Completed updates are compressed, verified, and admitted as compact gists ( Gi), making reusable progress visible to all agents. When the task queue becomes empty, the most recently completed agent checks the existing subtask states and shared context to decide whether additional subtasks are needed. If so, it generates and enqueues new tasks for another round of parallel execution; otherwise, it produces the final answer. 

Algorithm 1 D ELM pipeline. DELM maintains a shared context C and a task queue T . Agents execute queued subtasks in parallel, compress and verify their results {ri} into compact gists, admit verified gists to the shared context, optionally generate additional subtasks from accumulated state, and finally produce the answer from the verified shared context. 

Input: Task D; optional source context U

Output: Final answer Y 

> 1:

C ← ∅ ▷ shared context  

> 2:

T ← GENERATE SUBTASKS (D, U ) 1 

> 3:

repeat  

> 4:

{ri} ← RUN AGENTS (T , C) ▷ execute subtasks in parallel 2 

> 5:

{Gi} ← COMPRESS AND VERIFY ({ri}) 3 

> 6:

C ← C ∪ { Gi} ▷ admit verified gists  

> 7:

if T is empty then  

> 8:

T ← GENERATE MORE SUBTASKS (D, C) 4 

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

until T is empty  

> 11:

Y ← FINALIZE (D, C) 5 

> 12:

return Y

53.1 Shared Context and Task Queue 

DELM maintains two global structures: a shared context C and a task queue T . The shared context stores compact, reusable problem state, including source evidence, completed subtask results, failed hypotheses, and intermediate constraints. The task queue stores pending subtasks that available agents can claim in parallel. Together, C and T define the coordination interface: agents choose work from T and communicate progress through admitted entries in C.The key design choice is that C contains gist entries Gi rather than raw traces. Each gist summarizes information useful for future agents and points to more detailed evidence that can be retrieved through selective unfolding. Thus, every worker can read a lightweight global view of the current problem state without losing access to the underlying details. The task queue determines how agents act on the shared state. Agents claim ready subtasks from T

asynchronously; after a gist is admitted into C, later agents can build on the finding, avoid a falsified hypothesis, or reuse a partial solution without waiting for a central controller to redistribute it. When the queue is exhausted, the most recently completed agent uses the current subtask states and shared context to determine whether further subtasks are needed. If so, it generates and enqueues new subtasks conditioned on T and C; otherwise, it finalizes the answer from the accumulated shared state. Appendix A.4 provides further details on dependency-aware queueing, parallel execution, and systems optimizations 

3.2 Compression and Verified Admission 

DELM treats each shared-context update as an admission problem. Rather than writing raw agent outputs or unverified summaries directly into C, it first compresses each completed result into a reusable gist and verifies that gist against its supporting evidence. Only updates that pass this gate become visible to other agents. Specifically, given a completed result ri, D ELM chooses the compression path based on the type of content being admitted. If ri is a reasoning trajectory, it may contain a successful finding, a falsified hypothesis, execution feedback, or a constraint for future agents. Since later agents usually need the distilled conclusion rather than the full trace, D ELM directly compresses ri into a gist Gi. If ri is a long source unit, however, direct gist-to-raw unfolding can be unreliable: the gist may not preserve enough detail to identify the exact raw span to unfold, while unfolding many candidate chunks to compensate is expensive. D ELM therefore uses a hierarchical path, ri → Si → Gi: it first constructs a reference-grounded summary Si, then compresses Si into the compact gist Gi admitted to C. Both 

Si and the raw content remain in backing stores and can be recovered through selective unfolding. Appendix A.1 and Appendix A.2 give the full hierarchy and unfolding procedure, and Section 4.3.1 validates this design through the “No Hierarchical Summary” ablation. In operating-system terms, the gist layer functions as the small, always-resident working set visible to every agent, while Si and the raw store serve as backing storage. Selective unfolding acts like demand paging, loading finer-grained evidence into an agent’s context only when the current subtask requires it. Verification follows the same two paths. For a reasoning trajectory, D ELM checks whether the gist 

Gi faithfully captures the relevant finding, failure, feedback, or constraint in ri using an LLM verifier. For a long source unit, verification is performed at both levels: the summary Si must be supported by the raw source, and the gist Gi must preserve the supported claims and important qualifiers from 

Si. Gists that pass are appended to C and become visible to later agents; gists that fail are rejected, regenerated with feedback. Appendix A.3 gives the full admission-time verification procedure. 64 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

We first evaluate D ELM on two representative benchmarks that stress complementary aspects of multi-agent coordination: software-engineering test-time scaling and long-context multi-doc reasoning. Section 5 later studies how D ELM can be combined with RLM (Zhang et al., 2025). (1) SWE-bench Verified (Jimenez et al., 2024). A software-engineering benchmark built from real-world GitHub issues with human-verified task specifications and tests. We use it to evaluate agentic coding in realistic repository environments, where agents must inspect codebases, identify relevant files, implement fixes, and validate them through tests. This benchmark is especially suitable for our setting because its tasks require iterative exploration and coordination over large codebases rather than retrieving a single local answer. (2) LongBench-v2 (Bai et al., 2025). A long-context benchmark designed to evaluate deep under-standing and reasoning over realistic tasks. We focus on its multi-document QA setting, which contains 125 samples across diverse domains: Financial (15 samples), Government (23 samples), Multi-News (23 samples), Legal (14 samples), and Academic (50 samples). This setting is also suit-able for our evaluation because its questions require multi-hop reasoning over evidence distributed across long contexts, rather than extracting a single local span. We compare D ELM against different baselines. Base directly invokes the LLM once over the full input to produce an answer, without any decomposition or multi-agent orchestration. Claude Code (Anthropic, 2026) is a tool-augmented agentic baseline that performs programmatic inspection and context compression to handle long inputs. mini-SWE-agent (Yang et al., 2024) is a lightweight software-engineering agent that uses a simple linear agent loop with Bash as its primary interface. 

AOrchestra (Ruan et al., 2026) is a centralized multi-agent system in which a main orchestrator dynamically creates specialized sub-agents on demand, instantiating each as a tuple of instruction, context, tools, and model to execute individual subtasks. ReadAgent (Lee et al., 2024) is an agentic long-context baseline that compresses the input into short gist memories and looks up the original passages when a subtask needs details the gists omit. For base models, we use Gemini 3 Flash (Doshi, 2025) and Claude Opus 4.6 (Anthropic, 2026) for the SWE-bench experiments; and GPT-5.4 (OpenAI, 2026), Claude Sonnet 4.6 (Anthropic, 2025), Gemini 3 Flash, and DeepSeek-V4-Pro (DeepSeek-AI, 2026) for the LongBench-v2 experiments. All base models are evaluated through OpenRouter with default reasoning and sampling parame-ters. For Claude Code, we route the CLI through OpenRouter to support alternative base models and allow access to tools such as Read, Grep, and Bash. For AOrchestra, following the original configuration, we set max-attempts = 10 for the orchestrator and max-steps = 50 for each sub-agent. For ReadAgent, we set min-lookup-pages = 1 and max-lookup-pages = 6 , and use a 100-token gist budget, matching the gist budget used by D ELM. 

4.2 SWE-bench Verified 

SWE-bench Verified evaluates whether D ELM can improve test-time scaling in agentic software-engineering tasks. These tasks are largely sequential: each action depends on the outcome of the previous one, leaving little room to parallelize work within a single trajectory. Therefore, we scale across trajectories: we run each task X times (with X ∈ { 2, 4}) and count it as solved if any one of the X attempts yields a correct patch. We report three metrics: Avg.@1 is the mean per-trial success rate, i.e., the expected accuracy of a single attempt; while Pass@2 and Pass@4 measure whether at least one of 2 or 4 attempts solves the task. 7Table 1: Comparison on SWE-bench Verified across two base models. Best values are bolded. 

Method Avg.@1 Pass@2 Pass@4 Cost/Task 

Gemini 3 Flash 

mini-SWE-agent 54.7% 65.6% 75.1% $0.26 Claude Code 49.3% 57.1% 66.3% – a

AOrchestra 55.2% 64.5% 73.2% $0.24 AOrchestra-Parallel 56.4% 63.2% 71.8% $0.25 

DELM 65.7% 72.9% 77.4% $0.12 

Claude Opus 4.6 

mini-SWE-agent 76.9% 79.8% 81.7% $0.61 

Claude Code 76.1% 79.5% 81.3% $0.69 AOrchestra 74.7% 78.3% 80.1% $0.70 AOrchestra-Parallel 75.2% 78.1% 79.7% $0.73 

DELM 78.0% 80.7% 82.5% $0.63    

> aThe Claude Code CLI sends cache_control blocks in the Anthropic API format, so cache reuse only works if the upstream provider honors those blocks. For Gemini-3-Flash the real cost without cache reuse is therefore around $1 per task.

Different methods use the same test-time scaling budget in different ways. For Base, mini-SWE-agent, Claude Code, and the original AOrchestra, we run X independent attempts per task. Each trajectory starts from scratch and does not reuse intermediate discoveries from other attempts. We also introduce AOrchestra-Parallel, a variant built on AOrchestra. It starts each task once, but allows the main agent at each step to spawn up to X subtasks and sub-agents in parallel, aggregate their outputs, and use the combined information to decide the next step. These parallel threads are therefore coupled through the main agent. D ELM uses the same agent harness as AOrchestra and likewise allows parallel threads to inform one another, but agents communicate through a verified shared context rather than through a central controller. Table 1 shows that D ELM achieves the best performance across both base models. With Gemini 3 Flash, D ELM reaches 65.7% Avg.@1, 72.9% Pass@2, and 77.4% Pass@4, outperforming all baselines on every metric. The largest gain appears in Avg.@1, where D ELM exceeds the strongest baseline, AOrchestra-Parallel, by 9.3 percentage points. At the same time, D ELM reduces cost to $0.12 per task, roughly half the cost of the strongest agentic baselines. This shows that the improvement comes from using the same test-time budget more effectively, rather than from launching more trajectories or spending more tokens. AOrchestra-Parallel improves Avg.@1 over the original AOrchestra, but performs worse on Pass@2 and Pass@4. This suggests that coupling parallel threads through a main agent can make attempts more consistent, but may also reduce exploration diversity. The gains with Claude Opus 4.6 are smaller, likely because the base model is already strong and leaves less room for coordination to help. Even so, D ELM still achieves the highest accuracy across Avg.@1, Pass@2, and Pass@4, while remaining close to the lowest-cost method, only $0.02 per task above mini-SWE-agent. 8Overall, these results support our central claim: test-time scaling is more effective when parallel agents communicate through shared state. By making compact progress visible across trajectories, DELM lets later agents avoid redundant exploration, build on prior findings, and focus on unre-solved parts of the task. Section 4.2.1 analyzes these mechanisms through trace-level examples. 

4.2.1 Why D ELM Is Both Accurate and Cost-Efficient on SWE-bench 

Three trace-level mechanisms explain why D ELM improves both accuracy and cost efficiency. In the DELM traces below, each shared entry is one thread’s verified note, tagged with its thread id ( t0 ,

t1 , . . . ) and a type such as FACT , FAIL , or PATCH_SUMMARY .

(1) Parallel agents complement each other by sharing failures. The first mechanism is that failed hypotheses become reusable state rather than private dead ends. In isolated forks, a negative result remains local to one trajectory, so other attempts may spend their own budget rediscovering the same failure. In D ELM, once such a failure is admitted to the shared context, later agents can treat it as a constraint and redirect their search. This mechanism appears in the trace below. The task fixes lambdify for single-element tuples. The natural guess, the Python printer layer, is a red herring; the real bug is on a separate tuple-building path in sympy/utilities/lambdify.py :                   

> [t0/ FACT ] AbstractPythonCodePrinter change did not affect lambdify output [t1/ FACT ] sympy/utilities/lambdify.py:964 _recursive_to_string manual tuple join bypasses printer fix [t0/ FACT ] sympy/utilities/lambdify.py:964 manual join for tuples lacks trailing comma logic

The load-bearing update is the negative result in the first line: thread t0 shows that changing the printer does not affect the output. After reading this failure, t1 avoids repeating the same detour and localizes the actual bypass in _recursive_to_string ; t0 then records the concrete defect, the missing trailing comma. Thus, D ELM turns a failed hypothesis into shared progress, improving later agents’ search efficiency. 

(2) Admitted constraints remain binding shared state. The second mechanism is that D ELM preserves important constraints as shared state rather than routing them through a central controller. In centralized coordination, a main agent may soften, omit, or reopen constraints discovered by sub-agents before they can guide later work. This mechanism appears in the trace below. Folding multiple search filters into one .filter() call is unsafe for multi-valued relations, where .filter(A).filter(B) and .filter(A, B) differ. In AOrchestra-Parallel, a sub-agent finds exactly this danger, but the constraint must pass through the main agent, which reopens the optimization and softens it into a tradeoff about reducing joins “for many use cases”; the run fails. The relevant fact was found, but not preserved as binding state. In contrast, D ELM keeps the constraint explicit and reusable:                           

> [t3/ FAIL ] django/contrib/admin/options.py:1041 single .filter() breaks M2M multi-term search [t3/ FACT ] Django ORM .filter(Q1, Q2) vs .filter(Q1).filter(Q2) differs for multi-valued relations [t3/ FACT ] lookup_spawns_duplicates determines if single .filter() is safe [t1/ FACT ] lookup_spawns_duplicates preserves M2M search semantics while optimizing FKs

9Thread t3 records the unsafe case (FAIL ), the semantic reason, and the predicate 

lookup_spawns_duplicates , which determines when the optimization is valid. Thread t1 

then builds on this state to preserve M2M semantics while still optimizing foreign-key cases. Thus, later threads inherit the binding constraint rather than reopening a globally invalid simplification. 

(3) Compact patch summaries carry discoveries. The third mechanism is compact sharing, which lowers cost by preventing peer communication from becoming another long raw transcript. Sharing full traces would preserve information, but would also expose every worker to command history, file dumps, failed edits, and intermediate reasoning. D ELM instead shares a compressed version of the useful discovery, so later workers can reuse the result without reading the entire trajectory. This mechanism appears in the trace below. Both the shared and no-share settings solve the task, but compact sharing reduces the cost from $0.399 to $0.125. The difference is not that D ELM shares more context; rather, it shares a compressed version of the useful search result (labeled as PATCH_SUMMARY ), which is generated by an LLM summarizer. One thread first rules out the ordinary tuple-printer path and localizes the actual bypass in lambdify.py :                         

> [t1/ FACT ] StrPrinter._print_tuple at sympy/printing/str.py:868 already includes trailing comma logic [t1/ FACT ] sympy/utilities/lambdify.py:964 lacks trailing comma for single-element tuples [t1/PATCH_SUMMARY] files=sympy/utilities/lambdify.py |idea=Modify _recursive_to_string to add atrailing comma for single-element tuples |evidence= reproduce_issue.py PASSED

This patch summary turns a multi-step debugging trajectory into a short, evidence-backed handoff. Later workers do not need the full command history, file dumps, failed edits, or intermediate reasoning. Thus, compact sharing preserves the reusable discovery while avoiding the cost of exposing every peer to the raw trace, explaining why D ELM solves the task at much lower cost. Together, these examples explain the trend in Table 1: D ELM keeps reusable facts, failures, con-straints, and patch summaries visible to all peers, while avoiding both redundant isolated search and the high token cost of raw trace sharing. This improves per-thread success while reducing cost. 

4.3 LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA 

LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA evaluates whether D ELM can improve evidence aggregation across long documents. Unlike SWE-bench Verified, where progress within one trajectory is largely sequential, this setting exposes substantial within-task parallelism: different agents can inspect different documents, identify complementary evidence, and contribute to a shared answer state. As shown in Table 2, D ELM achieves the highest average accuracy across all four model families: 60.1% with GPT-5.4, 59.8% with Claude Sonnet 4.6, 61.5% with Gemini 3 Flash, and 67.5% with DeepSeek-V4-Pro. Compared with the strongest baseline for each model family, these correspond to gains of 5.7, 5.3, 4.4, and 3.6 percentage points, respectively. D ELM also achieves the best or tied-best result in most domain-model combinations, suggesting that the benefit comes from a general improvement in evidence selection and reuse rather than from a single model or domain. These gains come from first building a verified hierarchical view of the document set, enabling more targeted detailed inspection. D ELM first splits the input into chunks and uses a lightweight summarizer, DeepSeek-V4-Flash (DeepSeek-AI, 2026) by default, to produce hierarchical summaries. Verified gists are then admitted to the shared context, giving all agents a compact view of the 10 Table 2: Accuracy (%) comparison on LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA across four base models. Results are mean ±std over 3 independent runs. Numbers in parentheses denote the number of samples in each domain. Best values are bolded. 

Method Fin. (15) Govern. (23) MNews (23) Legal (14) Acad. (50) Avg. 

GPT-5.4 

Base 62.2 ±9.3 39.1 ±1.7 50.5 ±8.6 62.0 ±4.4 56.0 ±1.2 53.9 ±4.9 

Claude Code 65.0 ±8.3 36.2 ±2.0 50.7 ±2.0 59.5 ±3.4 60.7 ±0.9 54.4 ±3.1 

ReadAgent 57.8 ±3.9 34.8 ±5.0 52.2 ±8.7 61.9 ±4.4 58.0 ±1.2 53.0 ±3.3 

DELM 71.1 ±3.1 43.5 ±2.0 65.2 ±2.0 64.3 ±5.8 56.0 ±2.8 60.1 ±1.2 

Claude Sonnet 4.6 

Base 68.9 ±3.9 34.8 ±1.1 46.4 ±2.0 52.4 ±3.4 64.0 ±0.9 53.3 ±1.9 

Claude Code 66.7 ±1.1 42.0 ±2.0 47.8 ±4.4 50.0 ±3.4 52.0 ±3.4 51.7 ±2.4 

ReadAgent 62.2 ±3.9 44.9 ±4.4 43.5 ±4.4 57.1 ±4.1 64.7 ±2.3 54.5 ±3.8 

DELM 73.3 ±3.1 46.4 ±2.0 55.1 ±2.0 59.5 ±3.4 64.7 ±0.9 59.8 ±1.5 

Gemini 3 Flash 

Base 80.0 ±0.0 30.4 ±0.0 43.5 ±0.0 71.4 ±0.0 60.0 ±2.3 57.1 ±3.3 

Claude Code 73.3 ±3.1 26.1 ±1.5 39.1 ±0.0 57.1 ±2.1 52.0 ±1.9 49.5 ±2.2 

ReadAgent 75.6 ±2.3 21.7 ±4.4 46.4 ±2.9 69.0 ±3.4 62.0 ±2.3 54.9 ±1.1 

DELM 82.2 ±3.1 37.8 ±1.6 52.2 ±1.5 71.4 ±0.0 64.0 ±0.0 61.5 ±0.6 

DeepSeek-V4-Pro 

Base 86.7 ±3.1 47.8 ±2.0 44.9 ±2.0 76.2 ±3.4 64.0 ±0.9 63.9 ±1.3 

Claude Code 84.4 ±3.1 36.2 ±2.0 56.5 ±4.4 64.3 ±2.1 48.7 ±0.9 58.0 ±0.9 

ReadAgent 71.1 ±3.9 43.5 ±4.4 30.4 ±2.3 38.1 ±4.1 50.7 ±1.2 46.8 ±1.8 

DELM 86.7 ±5.4 52.2 ±2.0 59.4 ±4.4 73.8 ±3.4 65.3 ±0.9 67.5 ±1.2 

corpus before they choose what to inspect in detail. This upfront global view helps agents identify cross-document connections, selectively unfold evidence, and avoid poorly targeted reading. In contrast, centralized and programmatic-inspection baselines make more local inspection deci-sions, often from metadata, file names, or keyword matches before observing the relevant content. Early mistakes can therefore compound: a controller may inspect the wrong evidence, miss cross-document links, or require additional rounds of delegation. ReadAgent also uses gists, but its lookup process directly depends on lossy summaries, without hierarchical unfolding and admission-time verification. As a result, these baselines can cost less in long-context settings because they avoid the upfront cost of constructing and verifying a structured view of the full context. D ELM makes a different trade-off: it spends additional computation on hierarchical summarization and verification, but gains a more reliable understanding of the corpus, leading to more targeted evidence selection and higher prediction accuracy. 11 No Verification No Hierarchical       

> Summary
> Both
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> Accuracy (%)
> 55.2%
> 57.7%
> 60.1%
> (a) Modular Setting
> 50 100 150
> 58.3% 60.1% 60.3%
> (b) Gist Length (tokens)
> DeepSeek-
> V4-Flash
> DeepSeek-
> V4-Pro
> GPT-5.4
> 60.1% 60.4% 59.9%
> (c) Gist Summarizer

Figure 4: Ablation and robustness analysis on LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA. All bars report accuracy averaged over the five domains with GPT-5.4. (a) Modular ablation: removing either the verification step or the hierarchical summary lowers accuracy. (b, c) D ELM is largely insensitive to its gist configuration: accuracy is stable once the gist is long enough (b) and across summarizers of varying cost (c). In every panel, the darker bar marks the default configuration used in Table 2. 

4.3.1 Which Components Make D ELM Effective on LongBench-v2 Modular ablation. To isolate the contribution of D ELM’s two core components, we remove admission-time verification and hierarchical summarization in turn, and report average accuracy over the five domains in Figure 4(a). Removing verification causes the largest drop, from 60.1% to 55.2%, showing that unsupported claims can corrupt downstream reasoning when they enter the shared context unchecked. Removing hierarchical summarization also hurts performance, lowering accuracy to 57.7%, because gist-only routing provides a coarser path from global navigation to raw evidence. Thus, both components matter, with verification contributing the larger gain. The trajectory evidence explains why the “No Hierarchical Summary” ablation degrades perfor-mance. Without the intermediate Si layer, D ELM must either route from a lossy gist directly to raw chunks or unfold many raw chunks to recover missing details. The PUMA EBIT query illustrates this failure mode. The document contains competing 2024 EBIT outlooks: an earlier range from the annual report and a later narrowed range from the H1 2024 interim report. The gist layer identifies candidate chunks, but the Si summary is what determines which source is later in time, localizes the relevant sub-chunk, and flags that the exact EBIT range must be recovered from raw evidence: (S72.2 denotes the second segment of chunk 72, retrieved by scanning summary S72 .) 

[t1] The later-in-time source is the H1 2024 interim report, which reiterates sales growth expectations and a narrowed EBIT outlook. The latest 2024 EBIT guidance is located in [S72.2]. [t1] However, the summaries do not provide the actual EBIT range values, so the precise latest target cannot be determined from summaries alone. 

Only after this coarse-to-fine localization does the worker request raw evidence. The deep un-fold then retrieves the precise anchored sub-chunk rather than the full report ( RAW denotes the corresponding raw text recovered by unfolding): 

[S72.2 RAW] ... we narrow our outlook for the operating result (EBIT) to a range of EUR 620 million to EUR 670 million ... 

12 This example shows why the hierarchy Gi → Si → raw is load-bearing. The gist supports cheap global navigation, the Si summary localizes the relevant raw span and detects when summary-level evidence is insufficient, and raw unfolding recovers the exact values. Removing the Si layer therefore weakens both evidence localization and cost-controlled reasoning, matching the performance drop in Figure 4(a). The trajectory evidence also explains why removing verification hurts performance. In D ELM, agent outputs are not admitted into the shared context immediately; they must first be checked against their cited evidence. This prevents plausible but unsupported statements from becoming reusable shared state. In a legal question comparing Lucy v. Zehmer and Texaco v. Pennzoil , one agent introduced a specific damages claim that was not supported by its cited summary:                     

> [t2 OUTPUT] Pennzoil/Texaco is summarized as only conditionally affirmed, with punitive damages reduced from USD 3billion to USD 1billion [S5].

However, the cited gist only states that the case involved a conditional affirmance with remittitur; it does not contain the specific damages amounts. The verifier (an LLM) therefore rejects the update:                               

> [t2 VERIFY] WRONG: the claim that punitive damages were reduced from USD 3billion to USD 1billion is unsupported;[S5] only says there was aconditional affirmance with remittitur and gives no specific amounts.

After retry, the unsupported numerical claim is removed before the result is committed to C. Without this admission-time gate, the false detail would become available to later workers and the finisher as if it were grounded evidence, explaining the drop under the “No Verification” ablation in Figure 4(a). 

Gist length. We vary the target gist length across 50, 100, and 150 tokens per source unit (Fig-ure 4(b)). Accuracy improves from 58.3% at 50 tokens to 60.1% at 100 tokens, then plateaus at 60.3% with 150 tokens. This suggests a threshold effect: once the gist is long enough to capture a source unit’s relevance, additional length provides little benefit. We therefore use 100 tokens in the main experiments. Selective unfolding likely contributes to this stability, since agents can recover finer details from Si or the raw source when the gist is insufficient. 

Summarization model. We also vary the gist summarizer ( ϕ2, defined in § A.1), using DeepSeek-V4-Flash, DeepSeek-V4-Pro, and GPT-5.4 while keeping the rest of the pipeline fixed (Figure 4(c)). Accuracy remains nearly unchanged across the three summarizers (60.1%, 60.4%, and 59.9%, re-spectively), with the cheapest model, DeepSeek-V4-Flash (our default), matching the stronger alternatives. Thus, a lightweight summarizer is sufficient for constructing the shared context, allowing D ELM to reserve stronger models for subtask reasoning without sacrificing accuracy. 

# 5 Combining D ELM with RLM 

Recursive Language Models (RLMs) (Zhang et al., 2025) process long contexts by recursively selecting context segments, issuing sub-calls, and composing the resulting partial answers. Crucially, RLM performs this process through a code-mediated Read-Eval-Print Loop (REPL): the long input is stored as an external variable that the model can inspect, parse, and aggregate programmatically. This makes RLM a natural fit for OOLONG (Bertsch et al., 2025), an aggregation-heavy benchmark where each sample consists of timestamped, user-attributed entries and answering a question often requires classifying many entries before computing a distributional answer. 13 Method Acc. Cost/Task 

OOLONG 

RLM 56.0% $0.43 DELM 53.3% $0.47 DELM+RLM 64.0% $0.40 

LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA 

RLM 55.8% $0.29 DELM 57.9% $0.30 DELM+RLM 60.3% $0.24 

Table 3: Comparison of RLM, D ELM, and their hybrid on LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA and OO-LONG using GPT-5. We first evaluate D ELM and RLM separately on both LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA and OO-LONG using GPT-5 with medium reasoning (RLM uses GPT-5-mini for sub-calls and recur-sion depth=1). As shown in Table 3, the two methods have complementary strengths. On LongBench-v2, D ELM achieves higher average accuracy than RLM at roughly the same cost per task. On OOLONG, however, D ELM un-derperforms RLM in both average accuracy and cost. This is because OOLONG is closer to a structured data-processing benchmark than a conversational reasoning benchmark (such as LongBench-v2): many questions require exact counting, filtering, comparison, and tie han-dling. In this setting, the natural-language shared context used by D ELM is not reliable. RLM performs better because its core interface is code-mediated: through a REPL environment, the model can inspect, parse, transform, and aggregate the input using executable programs and programmatic sub-calls. However, RLM still relies on centralized coordination, where recursive calls report back to a root process that must reconcile and aggregate their outputs. This centralized aggregation is less suitable for natural-language multi-document reasoning, helping explain RLM’s weaker LongBench-v2 performance. These results motivate a hybrid design that combines RLM’s precise REPL-based execution with DELM’s decentralized coordination. We therefore combine the two methods by retaining RLM as the underlying reasoner while adding two D ELM components: a verified shared context and a decentralized task queue. In this hybrid setting, there is no main-agent/sub-agent hierarchy; all agents are equally ranked RLM instances that coordinate through shared state. An initial RLM call produces a compact work plan, after which subtasks are placed into the task queue and claimed by parallel RLM workers. Each worker’s output is admitted into the shared context only after passing the verification gate. The system then generates any additional subtasks from the current problem state, and computes the final answer from the verified shared context once no further subtasks are needed. This design preserves RLM’s strength in precise code-mediated execution while adding D ELM’s decentralized coordination. As shown in Table 3, the combined method achieves the best accuracy and lowest cost on both benchmarks, indicating that RLM and D ELM are complementary rather than competing approaches. 

# 6 Related Work 

Multi-Agent Systems. Recent LLM-based multi-agent systems improve task performance by de-composing problems across specialized or interacting agents. Early frameworks such as CAMEL (Li et al., 2023) instantiate role-playing agents to study autonomous cooperation. MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) and ChatDev (Qian et al., 2024) further structure collaboration through software-engineering-inspired roles, communication protocols, and standardized workflows, demonstrating that specialization can reduce coordination complexity in multi-step tasks. AOrchestra (Ruan et al., 2026) dynamically creates task-specific sub-agents by instantiating their instructions, context, tools, and models; ToolOrchestra (Su et al., 2025) trains a lightweight orchestrator to coordinate models and tools under accuracy, efficiency, and user-preference rewards; Squeeze Evolve (Maheswaran 14 et al., 2026) routes different stages of evolutionary inference to models of different cost and capability; and RecursiveMAS (Yang et al., 2026) replaces text-level communication with recursive latent-state transfer across agents. Combee (Li et al., 2026) also identifies centralized aggregation as a bottleneck under high parallelism, but focuses on scaling parallel prompt learning rather than decentralized agent coordination. Recent blackboard-style MAS Han and Zhang (2025), Salemi et al. (2025) use a shared board to let agents exchange messages or volunteer information, either for general reasoning or for data discovery. These systems show that agent coordination can be scaled through dynamic delegation, learned orchestration, model routing, recursive collaboration, and shared blackboards. However, the orchestration-based methods primarily optimize how agents are created, routed, or composed, leaving the communication substrate itself unverified: intermediate outputs are passed, summarized, or aggregated without grounding each entry in its underlying evidence before downstream reuse; the blackboard-based methods write raw or lightly structured messages to the board and still route coordination through a selection step or a central poster. In contrast, D ELM treats the shared context as curated, verified state: agents coordinate fully asynchronously through a task queue with no central controller, every entry is admitted only after verification against its supporting evidence, and entries are stored as compact gists that unfold to finer detail on demand, keeping the shared state both reliable and scalable as the number of agents grows. 

Programmatic Agentic Systems. A closely related class of systems equips language models with programmatic interfaces to external environments, enabling them to inspect state, invoke tools, manipulate artifacts, and recursively delegate computation. Recursive Language Models (RLMs) (Zhang et al., 2025) apply this paradigm to long-context reasoning by treating the prompt as an external environment and recursively selecting snippets for inspection. It performs this process through a code-mediated Read-Eval-Print Loop (REPL). Agentic coding systems such as Claude Code (Anthropic, 2026) and Codex (OpenAI, 2025) extend this idea to software environments, allow-ing models to read repositories, edit files, execute commands, and incorporate tool feedback. These approaches demonstrate that coupling language models with executable environments substantially enhances capability beyond single-pass generation. However, programmatic access alone does not solve the coordination problem. In many systems, planning is still routed through a main agent or local tool loop, and intermediate results are reused as raw observations or prose summaries without an admission-time grounding step. As a result, useful discoveries may remain local to one trajectory, while unsupported claims or softened constraints can propagate through later reasoning. D ELM is complementary to these systems: it does not replace tools, code execution, or REPL-style inspection, but provides a decentralized coordination layer in which tool-derived findings, failures, and partial solutions can be compressed, verified, and shared across agents. This complementarity is reflected in our OOLONG experiments (§ 5), where combining D ELM with RLM improves over either method alone. 

Long-context LM systems. Another line of work addresses long-context reasoning by storing, compressing, or retrieving information beyond the model’s current context window. Mu et al. (2023) introduce a training-based approach that compresses long prompts into compact “gist” representations. Context-Folding (Sun et al., 2025) keeps long interactions within the context window by periodically compressing the conversation history. These methods reduce context length, but once fine-grained information is discarded, it cannot be reliably recovered when later reasoning requires precise details. ReadAgent (Lee et al., 2024) instead pairs compression with retrieval: it summarizes pages of text into short gist memories and looks up the original passages when a task 15 needs details the gists omit. However, because lookup is triggered from lossy gists, ReadAgent can miss evidence whose relevance is not preserved in the compressed representation. Memory-augmented systems such as LongMem (Wang et al., 2023), MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023), Mem0 (Chhikara et al., 2025), and MemOS (Li et al., 2025) introduce external memory mechanisms for LLMs to retain information across long interactions or task histories. For instance, MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023) proposes an operating-system-inspired virtual context mechanism to decide what to keep in the active context and what to move into external memory. These systems make memory persistent, but retrieval is usually flat: a memory item is either selected into context or omitted. DELM instead organizes shared information by abstraction level. Agents first reason over compact verified gists across the full problem, then selectively unfold relevant entries into detailed summaries and raw evidence. This hierarchy makes the shared context both global and recoverable. 

# 7 Limitations and Future Work 

While our results demonstrate the effectiveness of D ELM, several directions remain open for future exploration. First, admission-time verification trades a modest amount of overhead for stronger reliability guarantees; lighter-weight verifiers, including learned models or rule-based checks for common claim types, could further improve efficiency while preserving the grounding benefits we observe. Second, D ELM inherits the decomposition quality of agents. Overly coarse decompositions leave agents with under-specified subtasks, while overly aggressive decompositions can spawn unnecessary agents and overcomplicate reasoning. A promising direction is to train adaptive agents that decide when to split, merge, or terminate subtasks based on the shared context. Third, as noted in prior work (Zhang et al., 2025), there is no universally optimal prompt across models; different model families may require tailored prompts to elicit the intended behavior. Combining DELM with prompt-evolution methods such as GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2025) could further adapt its decomposition, summarization, and verification prompts to each model family. Beyond the benchmarks studied here, D ELM suggests a promising direction for automated research systems (AlphaEvolve team, 2025, Liu et al., 2026). Research workflows naturally combine test-time scaling with long-context reasoning: agents must explore alternative hypotheses, inspect large collections of papers or experimental logs, compare evidence across sources, and iteratively refine conclusions. A decentralized shared context could make such systems more efficient by preventing agents from repeatedly reading the same papers or rerunning the same failed analyses; more effective by allowing useful findings to propagate across parallel research threads; and more robust by admitting only verified claims into the shared state. We therefore view automated research as a natural application domain for future decentralized MAS. 

# 8 Conclusion 

We introduce D ELM, a decentralized multi-agent system in which agents coordinate through a shared context and task queue rather than a central controller. By admitting only compact, verified updates into shared state, D ELM turns intermediate progress into reusable problem state: agents can build on prior findings, avoid repeated failures, preserve constraints, and recover detailed evidence only when needed. On SWE-bench Verified, D ELM improves test-time scaling by making discoveries and failures reusable across parallel attempts, achieving higher pass rates while reducing cost. On LongBench-v2 Multi-Doc QA, D ELM improves long-context reasoning by constructing a verified, hierarchical view of the corpus, leading to higher accuracy. We further show that D ELM is complementary to RLM, where decentralized validated state improves programmatic aggregation. These results suggest that scalable multi-agent systems require not only more parallel agents, but also a reliable communication substrate for sharing progress across them. 16 9 Acknowledgments 

We thank Shayan Talaei, Jon Saad-Falcon, Jacky Kwok, Hermann Kumbong, Ishan Khare, Miria Feng, Qizheng Zhang, Swapnil Gandhi, Michael Y. Li, Chun Deng, Chong Zeng, Rui Li, Ke Li, Marquita Ellis, Hangoo Kang, Adrian Gamarra Lafuente, Charles Ding, Tarun Suresh, Ziyu Chen, Zhuohan Gu, Yize Liu, and Ligeng Zhu. We would also like to thank our collaborators at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL) and Stanford HAI. We gratefully acknowledge support from federal sources: NSF under No. 24-554 (AIMing) and DARPA under No. HR00112520038 (Fallingwater). We also gratefully acknowledge support from Stanford HAI, IBM (Code Generation), Lightspeed, Google, and Google DeepMind. 17 References 

Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, et al. Gepa: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.19457 , 2025. AlphaEvolve team. AlphaEvolve: A Gemini-powered coding agent for designing advanced algorithms. Google DeepMind Blog, May 2025. URL https://deepmind.google/blog/ alphaevolve-a-gemini-powered-coding-agent-for-designing-advanced-algorithms/ .Accessed: 2026-06-03. Anthropic. Claude Sonnet 4.6. https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-sonnet-4-6 ,2025. Accessed: 2026-05-06. Anthropic. Introducing Claude Opus 4.6. Anthropic, February 2026. URL https://www. anthropic.com/news/claude-opus-4-6 . Accessed: 2026-06-01. Anthropic. Claude code. https://claude.ai/ , 2026. Yushi Bai, Shangqing Tu, Jiajie Zhang, Hao Peng, Xiaozhi Wang, Xin Lv, Shulin Cao, Jiazheng Xu, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong, et al. Longbench v2: Towards deeper understanding and reasoning on realistic long-context multitasks. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3639–3664, 2025. Amanda Bertsch, Adithya Pratapa, Teruko Mitamura, Graham Neubig, and Matthew R Gorm-ley. Oolong: Evaluating long context reasoning and aggregation capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02817 , 2025. Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Building production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413 , 2025. DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-v4: Towards highly efficient million-token context intelligence, 2026. Tulsee Doshi. Gemini 3 Flash: Frontier Intelligence Built for Speed. Google — The Keyword, Decem-ber 2025. URL https://blog.google/products-and-platforms/products/gemini/ gemini-3-flash/ . Accessed: 2026-06-01. Zhaopeng Feng, Liangcai Su, Zhen Zhang, Xinyu Wang, Xiaotian Zhang, Xiaobin Wang, Runnan Fang, Qi Zhang, Baixuan Li, Shihao Cai, et al. Agentswing: Adaptive parallel context management routing for long-horizon web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.27490 , 2026. Bochen Han and Songmao Zhang. Exploring advanced llm multi-agent systems based on blackboard architecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01701 , 2025. Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In The twelfth international conference on learning representations ,2023. Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=VTF8yNQM66 .18 Kimi, Tongtong Bai, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, SH Cai, Yuan Cao, Y Charles, HS Che, Cheng Chen, Guanduo Chen, et al. Kimi k2. 5: Visual agentic intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02276 , 2026. Kuang-Huei Lee, Xinyun Chen, Hiroki Furuta, John Canny, and Ian Fischer. A human-inspired reading agent with gist memory of very long contexts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09727 , 2024. Guohao Li, Hasan Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. Camel: Communicative agents for" mind" exploration of large language model society. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:51991–52008, 2023. Hanchen Li, Runyuan He, Qizheng Zhang, Changxiu Ji, Qiuyang Mang, Xiaokun Chen, Lakshya A Agrawal, Wei-Liang Liao, Eric Yang, Alvin Cheung, et al. Combee: Scaling prompt learning for self-improving language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.04247 , 2026. Zhiyu Li, Shichao Song, Hanyu Wang, Simin Niu, Ding Chen, Jiawei Yang, Chenyang Xi, Huayi Lai, Jihao Zhao, Yezhaohui Wang, et al. Memos: An operating system for memory-augmented generation (mag) in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22101 , 2025. Shu Liu, Mert Cemri, Shubham Agarwal, Alexander Krentsel, Ashwin Naren, Qiuyang Mang, Zhifei Li, Akshat Gupta, Monishwaran Maheswaran, Audrey Cheng, Melissa Pan, Ethan Boneh, Kannan Ramchandran, Koushik Sen, Matei Zaharia, Alexandros G. Dimakis, and Ion Stoica. Skydiscover: A flexible, adaptive framework for ai-driven scientific and algorithmic discovery. In 

Proceedings of the ACM Conference on AI and Agentic Systems , CAIS ’26, pages 1223–1227. Association for Computing Machinery, 2026. doi: 10.1145/3786335.3813221. URL https://doi.org/10. 1145/3786335.3813221 .Monishwaran Maheswaran, Leon Lakhani, Zhongzhu Zhou, Shijia Yang, Junxiong Wang, Coleman Hooper, Yuezhou Hu, Rishabh Tiwari, Jue Wang, Harman Singh, et al. Squeeze evolve: Unified multi-model orchestration for verifier-free evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.07725 , 2026. Jesse Mu, Xiang Li, and Noah Goodman. Learning to compress prompts with gist tokens. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:19327–19352, 2023. OpenAI. Codex. https://openai.com/codex/ , 2025. OpenAI. Introducing GPT-5.4. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5-4/ , 2026. Accessed: 2026-05-06. Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir_G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph_E Gonzalez. Memgpt: towards llms as operating systems. 2023. Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, et al. Chatdev: Communicative agents for software development. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers) , pages 15174–15186, 2024. Jianhao Ruan, Zhihao Xu, Yiran Peng, Fashen Ren, Zhaoyang Yu, Xinbing Liang, Jinyu Xiang, Yongru Chen, Bang Liu, Chenglin Wu, et al. Aorchestra: Automating sub-agent creation for agentic orchestration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03786 , 2026. Alireza Salemi, Mihir Parmar, Palash Goyal, Yiwen Song, Jinsung Yoon, Hamed Zamani, Tomas Pfister, and Hamid Palangi. Llm-based multi-agent blackboard system for information discovery in data science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01285 , 2025. 19 Hongjin Su, Shizhe Diao, Ximing Lu, Mingjie Liu, Jiacheng Xu, Xin Dong, Yonggan Fu, Peter Belcak, Hanrong Ye, Hongxu Yin, et al. Toolorchestra: Elevating intelligence via efficient model and tool orchestration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21689 , 2025. Weiwei Sun, Miao Lu, Zhan Ling, Kang Liu, Xuesong Yao, Yiming Yang, and Jiecao Chen. Scaling long-horizon llm agent via context-folding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11967 , 2025. Weizhi Wang, Li Dong, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Xifeng Yan, Jianfeng Gao, and Furu Wei. Aug-menting language models with long-term memory. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:74530–74543, 2023. John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2405.15793 .Xiyuan Yang, Jiaru Zou, Rui Pan, Ruizhong Qiu, Pan Lu, Shizhe Diao, Jindong Jiang, Hanghang Tong, Tong Zhang, Markus J Buehler, et al. Recursive multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.25917 , 2026. Alex L Zhang, Tim Kraska, and Omar Khattab. Recursive language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24601 , 2025. 20 Supplementary Material Source       

> Stage 1
> Reference-grounded
> Summary
> Stage 2
> Highly Compact
> Gist
> ⋮
> Local Context Window Reference-grounded
> Summary
> Highly Compact
> Gist
> (a) Shared Context + Summarization (b) Selective Unfolding (c) Verification
> S1
> Shared Context Agent
> Shared Context ...
> DEEP_UNFOLD
> ...
> ...
> S2
> Sn
> G1
> G2
> Gn
> G1
> G2
> Gn
> ⋮

⋮ S1 S2 S3    

> UNFOLD
> SiGi
> APPROVED REWRITE WRONG
> Verifier Verifier

Figure 5: (a) Long source units are compressed into reference-grounded summaries Si and then compact gists Gi stored in the shared context. (b) Agents read gists by default, selectively unfold them to summaries or raw evidence when needed, and (c) admit entries only after verification. 

# A Method Details 

A.1 Hierarchical Summarization 

For long source units ri with label ℓi, D ELM uses a three-level representation, ri → Si → Gi.The shared context C stores only compact gist entries (ℓi, G i), giving every agent a lightweight global view of the corpus. The detailed backing content is stored outside C: L[ℓi] contains the reference-grounded summary Si, and R[ℓi] contains the corresponding raw source unit. This hierarchy avoids relying on a lossy gist to directly select raw evidence while also avoiding broad raw-context unfolding. Agents first reason over gists, then unfold to Si or raw evidence only when finer-grained support is needed. For reasoning trajectories, D ELM usually admits a direct gist 

Gi, since later agents typically need the distilled finding, failure, feedback, or constraint rather than the full trace; the original trajectory remains available in R[ℓi] when needed. We now describe the hierarchical summarization path for long source units. 

Stage 1: Si (ref-grounded evidence map). Given a source unit ui, the first-stage summarizer ϕ1

produces an evidence map consisting of a set of short bullets, each expressing a single atomic claim. Every bullet includes a ref-tag that identifies its supporting span in the raw text: 

[ref: h . . . t ], (1) where h and t denote the first and last N ≥ 5 words of the supporting span, respectively, copied verbatim. Formally, 

Si = ϕ1(ui; Q) = {(bi,k , ρ i,k )}mi

k=1 , ρi,k = ( hi,k , t i,k ), (2) where bi,k is the k-th bullet and ρi,k is its ref-tag. ϕ1 is conditioned on the question Q so that question-relevant content is extracted at higher fidelity. Full coverage of the source unit is required, as any portion may contain the critical evidence needed to answer the question. The resulting Si is stored in L[ℓi], with each bullet addressable by its local index k.

Stage 2: Gi (compact shared-context entry). A second-stage summarizer ϕ2 compresses Si into a short, highly compact gist: 

Gi = ϕ2(Si; Q). (3) 21 This gist captures the relevance of ui to the query at a density that allows downstream agents to decide, at a glance, whether further inspection is needed. Only Gi is admitted to C, while Si and the raw content remain in L and R and are accessed only through selective unfolding (§A.2). 

A.2 Selective Unfolding 

Agents reason over the shared context C by default, using the compact Gi entries. When additional detail is required, they invoke selective unfolding, a coarse-to-fine, opt-in mechanism for retrieving more detailed information on demand. We implement unfolding in two stages: first, from Gi to the reference-grounded summary Si, and then, if necessary, from Si to the raw source content. 

Stage 1: G → S (UNFOLD ). At any reasoning step, the agent may request a small set of labels via an 

UNFOLD: ℓ1, ℓ 2, . . . directive. The orchestrator retrieves the corresponding Si summaries L[ℓ] and inlines their bullet-level evidence maps into the agent’s prompt for that call. This enables the agent to reason over grounded evidence rather than compressed gists. 

Stage 2: S → raw (DEEP_UNFOLD ). After reasoning over the Si summaries, the agent may de-termine that finer-grained detail is required—for example, to resolve subtle qualifiers or verify exact wording. It can then emit a DEEP_UNFOLD: ℓ1, . . . directive specifying the labels whose raw content is needed. The orchestrator issues a follow-up call that combines the original task, the shared context C, the previously unfolded summaries Si, and the newly requested raw content from R.Unfolding proceeds in a coarse-to-fine, on-demand manner and may span multiple rounds up to a fixed limit, with each round allowing the agent to request additional Si or raw content as needed. Additionally, raw retrieval is also neighborhood-aware: requesting sub-chunk n returns n±1 as well, which helps absorb off-by-one citation errors. Importantly, unfolded content is local to the requesting call and is not written back to the shared context C, so subsequent agents still observe only the gist layer. This design prevents detailed intermediate content from polluting the shared context while preserving access to fine-grained evidence when necessary. As a result, the cost of detailed inspection scales with the amount of information actually required, rather than the total volume of available context. 

A.3 Admission-Time Verification 

Verification follows the compression path. For a reasoning trajectory, D ELM checks whether the gist 

Gi faithfully preserves the relevant finding, failure, feedback, or constraint from the original result 

ri. For a long source unit, D ELM verifies both levels of the hierarchy, first grounding the Stage-1 summary Si in the raw source and then checking the Stage-2 gist Gi against Si.Specifically, each Stage-1 bullet b with a reference (h, t ) is accepted only if the head h and tail T both appear, in order and verbatim, in the underlying source unit u. Bullets that fail this condition are routed to a targeted rewrite step, which either supplies a valid reference or drops the claim. After this gate, an iterative coverage loop identifies large uncovered regions, defined as contiguous spans not referenced by any admitted bullet, and requests additional bullets for each gap. Newly generated bullets must pass the same reference and semantic-support checks before being added to 

Si. The loop terminates when no large gaps remain or a fixed iteration limit is reached. The Stage-2 gist Gi is then produced from the verified Si. Because Si contains only grounded claims, 

Gi inherits this grounding at a coarse level. To guard against abstraction errors, Gi undergoes a lightweight verification step using a cheaper LLM, such as DeepSeek-V4-Flash, which checks for hallucinations, semantic drift, and missing critical qualifiers relative to Si. Only gists that pass this 22 check are admitted to C; otherwise, the update is rejected, regenerated, or returned to the task queue 

T with a rejection reason, up to a fixed retry limit. 

A.4 Parallel Execution and Systems Optimizations 

DELM uses three lightweight mechanisms to support safe and efficient parallel execution: concurrent admission with disciplined reads and writes, a dependency-aware task queue, and KV-cache reuse across calls. 

Concurrent admission and read/write discipline. Compression and verification are parallelized across completed results. Each finished agent independently proposes an update from its local result ri, and the corresponding summarization and verification calls can run concurrently. The only synchronized step is admission. Once an update passes verification, D ELM first writes its backing content to L and R, and then appends the visible entry (ℓi, G i) to C through an atomic write. Agents read lock-free snapshots of C at dispatch time; entries committed later become visible only on the next snapshot.This write-before-publish ordering ensures that every visible label can be unfolded without a race, that later agents observe only fully verified entries, and that slow summarization or verification calls do not impose a global synchronization barrier. 

Dependency-aware task queue. At the beginning, given an input task D, D ELM first constructs a task topology: a numbered list in which each task is annotated with a [deps : . . . ] tag specifying its upstream dependencies. Tasks with no dependencies are dispatched first; subsequent tasks become eligible as their dependencies complete. and subsequent tasks become eligible once their dependencies complete. When the queue is exhausted, a single agent acquires a queue lock and invokes G ENERATE MORE SUBTASKS with the current shared context C, the original plan, and the list of executed tasks. The function may return [DONE ] if the original plan has been completed and no further unfolding is expected to change the state of any sub-claim. This step also prevents dependency deadlock in practice: when no pending task is eligible, the system does not wait indefinitely, but invokes G ENERATE MORE SUBTASKS to create missing prerequisite subtasks, revise blocked dependencies, or terminate if the current shared context is sufficient. 

KV-cache reuse from a stable shared context. The shared-context design also improves KV-cache reuse. Because C is largely stable and accumulative, and consistently placed at the beginning of each model invocation, it forms a persistent prefix across calls. This is useful in multi-step reasoning, where many LLM calls share the same global state but differ only in the task-specific suffix. As a result, repeated computation over the shared prefix can be amortized, yielding larger efficiency gains as the number of reasoning steps grows. 23