Title: Multi-Agent Transactive Memory

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19911v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 00:35:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
## Multi-Agent Transactive Memory 

To Eun Kim 1* Xuhong He 1* Dishank Jain 1* 

Ambuj Agrawal 1 Negar Arabzadeh 2 Fernando Diaz 1

> 1

Carnegie Mellon University 2University of California, Berkeley 

Abstract 

The decentralized deployment of LLM agents with diverse capabilities across diverse tasks motivates infrastructure for knowledge sharing across heterogeneous agent populations. Just as search engines index human-generated ar-tifacts to support human problem solving, re-trieval systems can organize agent-generated artifacts for reuse across agent populations. We extend retrieval-augmented generation—which demonstrates the value of human-authored arti-facts to individual agents—to retrieval of agent-generated artifacts supporting a population of agents. In particular, agent trajectories encode reusable procedural knowledge, yet these arti-facts are typically discarded after a single use or retained only by the producing agent, forcing newly instantiated agents to repeatedly redis-cover existing solutions. We propose Multi-Agent Transactive Memory (MATM), a frame-work for population-level storage and retrieval of agent-generated trajectories, where producer agents contribute trajectories to a shared repos-itory and consumer agents retrieve them to improve task execution. We focus on interac-tive environments (ALFWorld and WebArena), where trajectories are long and encode espe-cially rich procedural structure. Our experi-ments demonstrate that retrieving trajectories from MATM improves downstream task per-formance and reduces interaction steps without coordination or joint training. These results po-sition MATM as a design pattern for population-level experience sharing in open agent ecosys-tems. 

1 Introduction 

As heterogeneous LLM agents are deployed across increasingly diverse domains, research on indi-vidual agent design must be complemented by methods for supporting decentralized populations 

> *

Denotes equal contribution. 

> *

https://github.com/kimdanny/matm INDEX    

> RETRIEVAL MODEL
> documents
> images
> videos
> human LLM agent
> TRADITIONAL RETRIEVAL RETRIEVAL-AUGMENTED
> GENERATION
> MULTI-AGENT TRANSACTIVE
> MEMORY
> INDEX
> RETRIEVAL MODEL
> documents
> images
> videos INDEX
> RETRIEVAL MODEL
> trajectories

Figure 1: Multi-Agent Transactive Memory (MATM). Traditional search serves humans retrieving human-authored documents. RAG extends this to agents re-trieving from human-generated corpora. MATM takes the next step by letting agents retrieve agent-generated artifacts such as interaction trajectories, which are atyp-ical documents that differ fundamentally from human-written text. MATM can continually grow while serving a distributed population of agents. 

of agents. The need for population-level infras-tructure has motivated protocols to support agent-tool interaction (Model Context Protocol, 2026) as well as inter-agent communication (A2A Proto-col, 2026). Beyond standards, tools such as search engines are beginning to be optimized for agents (Zamani et al., 2022; Salemi and Zamani, 2024b). Although retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) demonstrates the value of human-authored artifacts to individual agents, infrastructure for knowledge sharing amongst agents offers a compelling alterna-tive. Just as search engines index human-generated artifacts to support human problem solving, re-trieval systems can organize agent-generated ar-tifacts for reuse across agent populations (Figure 1). Artifact sharing and reuse are essential for en-abling scalable, efficient, and continually improv-ing agent populations. As agents operate across environments, they produce a number of inter-mediate artifacts, which contain rich procedural knowledge, such as action-observation trajectories (Muennighoff et al., 2025). Yet these artifacts are typically discarded after a single use or retained 1

> arXiv:2606.19911v1 [cs.AI] 18 Jun 2026

only by the producing agent (Zheng et al., 2024). The ability to efficiently reuse learned behaviors and continually acquire new knowledge or expe-rience becomes critical for scalability and long-term performance (Wang et al., 2025b; Liang et al., 2026; Shi et al., 2025). In contrast with RAG, agent-generated artifacts can be more suitable for agent consumption compared to human-authored docu-ments (Chen et al., 2026). The need for population-level reuse is further amplified by practical consid-erations. Many modern agents rely on inference-time scaling and generate a number of intermediate artifacts, incurring substantial computational cost (Kaplan et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024; Welleck et al., 2024). As a result, reusing those artifacts can reduce costs for reasoning and exploration (Ahmed et al., 2026). Existing approaches to artifact reuse are insuf-ficient for heterogeneous agent ecosystems. Prior work on reasoning or thought reuse (Zheng et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2026; Ahmed et al., 2026) improves cost-efficiency and effectiveness within individual agents, but reuse remains limited to the original artifact-producer; despite substantial over-lap in the tasks agents solve, interaction trajec-tories are typically discarded after a single use (Zheng et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024), causing newly instantiated agents to repeatedly rediscover solutions that already exist elsewhere in the ecosys-tem. Related paradigms such as transfer learning (Konidaris and Barto, 2007; Brunskill and Li, 2013) and knowledge distillation (Li et al., 2025; Kang et al., 2026) require alignment between source and target domains and often demand additional train-ing, making them impractical for diverse, dynam-ically instantiated populations of heterogeneous agents. Centralized multi-agent coordination meth-ods (Dang et al., 2025) further assume cooperative settings and shared protocols, constraining their applicability in open ecosystems (Tran et al., 2025) where agents can freely join at any time. Indeed, based on analysis of Moltbook, Li et al. (2026) identify shared social memory as a missing prereq-uisite for the development of agent societies. To address this gap, we propose Multi-Agent Transactive Memory (MATM), a framework for population-level storage and retrieval of agent-generated artifacts, based on the concept of trans-active memory (Wegner, 1987), in which human groups coordinate by distributing knowledge across individuals by using shared mechanisms for locat-ing and retrieving relevant information. Similarly, MATM maintains a shared repository to which agents can contribute artifacts produced during their own task execution ( producer agents ) and from which agents can retrieve procedural knowl-edge to improve their own task effectiveness and efficiency ( consumer agents ). Roles are not mutu-ally exclusive: an agent may produce trajectories in one context and consume them in another. This producer-consumer structure induces a two-sided marketplace for agent-generated procedural knowledge, with clear attribution between retrieved artifacts and their sources. As more agents inter-act with the repository, MATM grows organically, accumulating a corpus across an increasingly di-verse set of tasks and environments. Operating as a specialized retrieval system over agent-generated artifacts, MATM further enables retrieval functions that go beyond generic similarity search, includ-ing agent-specific personalization, producer trust modeling, and periodic update of retriever as the population evolves. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of MATM in interactive environments (ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021) and WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024)). We first show that agents consistently ben-efit from a simple single-stage retrieval pipeline: retrieving relevant trajectories from a MATM repos-itory populated by diverse agents not only improves downstream task performance without requiring additional coordination or joint training, but also improves task efficiency as measured by a reduced number of interaction steps. We further introduce an efficient yet powerful learning-to-rank (LTR)-based trajectory reranking stage. With simple featurization of trajectory information, reranking yields better retrieval quality, leading to improved task effectiveness and greater step efficiency. More-over, we find that retrieval benefit extends to both weaker and stronger agents, generalizes across tasks, and continues to improve as the repository grows. Taken together, our results demonstrate that MATM provides a scalable mechanism for population-level experience reuse, enabling agents to leverage collective trajectories rather than repeat-edly rediscovering solutions in isolation. 

2 Background (Appendix A) 

Memory has long played a role in the develop-ment of AI agents. Existing approaches can be understood as memory over various sources of data. Memory of training data provides agents 2with access to knowledge explicitly or implicitly stored during optimization. Explicit methods in-clude nearest-neighbor algorithms (Cover and Hart, 1967; Khandelwal et al., 2020) or case-based rea-soning (Kolodner, 1992; Das et al., 2021) or im-plicit behaviors (Carlini et al., 2023). Memory over experience data provides agents with access to traces of their own interactions. Historically, methods reflecting memory of experience data include early cognitive architectures like SOAR (Laird et al., 1987), reinforcement learning (Lin, 1992), and neural networks (Weston et al., 2015). In the context of LLM agents, recent extensions treat an agent’s own interaction history as retriev-able context, giving rise to memory-augmented generation where past conversations or execution traces guide future behavior (Shinn et al., 2023; Majumder et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024). Agents generate rich intermediate artifacts during prob-lem solving, including action-observation trajecto-ries, thinking traces, plans, workflows, and reusable code analogous to options in reinforcement learn-ing (Garcia et al., 2019; Veeriah et al., 2021). At the trajectory level, Buffer of Thoughts (Yang et al., 2024) and Retrieval of Thought (Ahmed et al., 2026) retrieve reasoning templates as in-context guidance, while Zheng et al. (2024) and Zhao et al. (2024) reuse action-observation trajectories for downstream decision-making. Beyond trajecto-ries, works such as CLIN (Majumder et al., 2024), Voyager (Wang et al., 2024), AWM (Wang et al., 2025b), MaestroMotif (Klissarov et al., 2025), ASI (Wang et al., 2025a), ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2026), and T3 (Arabzadeh et al., 2026) extract and reuse more abstract artifacts such as causal abstractions, workflows, skills, and exe-cutable code. Agent artifacts can further serve as distillation signals to transfer competence across models (Yang et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025; Kang et al., 2026). Memory of external data provides agent with access to shared artifact repositories and is represented by retrieval-augmented genera-tion (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020), which enhances language models by conditioning generation on retrieved external context (Fan et al., 2024). 

3 Multi-Agent Transactive Memory 

In existing memory systems, experience data is typ-ically reused only by the same or homogeneous agent(s) that produced it, leaving valuable experi-ence isolated and forcing less-experienced agents to rediscover existing solutions. In contrast, we propose a population-level memory of experience data, providing a collective memory for a popu-lation of agents. Rather than treating memory as private to each agent, we consider it a shared, struc-tured resource that heterogeneous agents can both contribute to and retrieve from. This shifts artifact reuse from an individual optimization mechanism to a collective knowledge infrastructure, enabling continual learning and cross-agent transfer, reduc-ing redundant exploration, and supporting cumula-tive capability growth at the population level. We consider a population of n LLM agents 

A = {Ai}ni=1 each potentially pursuing hetero-geneous goals and operating across one or more environments E = {Ei}mi=1 . A task is specified by a description x ∈ X , which corresponds to goal specification or initial state for an agent. Given a task description x in environment Ei, an LLM agent Aj performs a series of interleaved turns with the environment to solve the task. During this pro-cess, we can record a variable-length trajectory 

TEi,A j = ( τt)Ht=1 , where each step τt represents a unit of interaction. For example, in a web naviga-tion environment, each τt corresponds to an action-observation pair (e.g., a click action and the result-ing HTML observation) in the interaction sequence. For simplicity, we denote this agent-generated tra-jectory as T .As the agent population A operates across en-vironments E, these trajectories accumulate into a rich collection of intermediate artifacts. We denote the population-level artifact repository as 

D = {T } and refer to this incrementally growing shared memory as Multi-Agent Transactive Mem-ory (MATM). Within this framework, we refer to agents that contribute trajectories to D as producer agents and those that retrieve from it to aid their own task-solving as consumer agents , where these roles are not mutually exclusive. Our goal is to study how retrieval from this population-level mem-ory can be optimized to improve outcomes for the population of consumer agents. Although we focus on raw trajectories, this does not preclude higher-level abstractions such as skills or induced policies. We operate with trajectories as the lowest-level and most universally available out-puts produced by agents across environments, and therefore provide a natural foundation for studying indexing and retrieval in MATM while still allow-ing higher-level abstractions such as skill induction (Klissarov et al., 2025) to be built on top. More-3over, retrieval over interactive trajectories is itself non-trivial. Prompt-like artifacts such as SKILL.md 

files can be indexed with standard RAG techniques (Liang et al., 2026) or further transformed into more retrieval-friendly forms (Arabzadeh et al., 2026), but state-conditioned retrieval over action-observation histories has received much less atten-tion and is the setting we study. 

3.1 Transactive Memory Indexing & Retrieval 

For action-observation trajectories, we adopt a state-conditioned key-value indexing scheme in which recent interaction history serves as the re-trieval key and the subsequent interaction segment as the stored value. This allows consumer agents to retrieve continued guidance conditioned on their current state rather than only on the original task instruction. Given a window size l, for each interaction step 

t we define the key e(t) 

> key

= f (x, τ t−l+1 , . . . , τ t)

and the associated value as the next l steps, 

(τt, . . . , τ t+l−1) which serves as the document d

that an agent retrieves at inference time, where f is a shared embedding function, and τi contains both an observation and an action. Given a task description x and MATM memory 

D, a trajectory retriever R forms a search query q,following the process described above and returns a ranked list π = R(x, D, K ) of candidate trajectory chunks, where higher-ranked chunks are predicted to be more relevant for the current task and state. The trajectory retriever R may be instantiated as a dense retriever, or a cascaded retrieval pipeline combining an initial retriever with a reranker. Although the embedding model f can in princi-ple be tuned to better support artifact retrieval, we instead explore a simpler and underexamined ap-proach that aligns retrieval results with consumer-agent preferences using lightweight learning-to-rank (LTR) rerankers (Cao et al., 2007). 

3.2 Learning To Rank Trajectories (LTRT) 

Learning to rank pipelines consist of a retrieval stage known as candidate generation, followed by a feature-based ranking stage that re-orders the retrieved candidates. A feature map ϕ is designed to capture multi-ple complementary aspects of trajectory usefulness. Let ϕ(q, d ) ∈ Rz be a feature map that extracts features by inspecting the query q and document key d. Let gθ : Rz 7 → R be a parameterized scor-ing function, where larger outputs indicate greater predicted helpfulness of a document d value for task q.In MATM, we define features in six categories: (i) producer agent metadata (e.g.,relevant bench-mark scores); (ii) consumer agent metadata (e.g., agent ID); (iii) first-stage retrieval features (e.g., retrieval scores); (iv) query features (e.g., query length); (v) trajectory features (e.g., trajectory length); and (vi) query-trajectory interaction fea-tures (e.g., query-trajectory embedding similarity). Two of these categories carry particular conceptual weight. Producer-agent metadata is designed to en-able a form of trust modeling , allowing the reranker to learn which producers’ trajectories are reliable for a given context. Consumer-agent metadata is designed to enable personalization of retrieval to the individual consumer that has joined the MATM framework, since the same trajectory may be more or less useful depending on the consumer’s capa-bilities. Training gθ requires supervision over which re-trieved trajectories actually help. Rather than treat-ing relevance as semantic similarity, we label tra-jectory chunks by their marginal utility (Salemi and Zamani, 2024a): a chunk is helpful to the extent that injecting it into the consumer agent improves task outcome relative to running the same agent with no retrieval. The concrete procedure for col-lecting these labels is intertwined with how the memory itself is built, and we describe both jointly in Section 4.1 and 4.2. 

4 Experimental Setup 

We instantiate MATM in two interactive bench-marks: ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021), a text-based household-task environment, and WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024), a web navigation-based task en-vironment. Each benchmark yields its own MATM index, populated by trajectories from 35 to 37 pro-ducer agents and consumed by 34 consumer agents (full population list in Appendix C). For ALFWorld, we use the official train and test split, using 3553 episodes from the official training set, and evaluating on all 274 official test episodes (Appendix D). For WebArena, which ships with-out a standard train/test partition, we construct a custom split that preserves the distribution of task intents, yielding 724 training and 88 test episodes (Appendix E). In both benchmarks, all MATM con-struction and LTRT training is performed strictly on the training partition, so the test set remains un-4touched throughout the MATM corpus construction phase. As a result, the test set may contain ques-tions whose task type or environment configuration overlaps with those seen during MATM construc-tion (e.g., similar map layouts in ALFWorld or shared website domains in WebArena), but no test question is itself solved by a producer agent and inserted into the corpus. 

4.1 Transactive Memory Construction 

To construct MATM emerging as a trajectory stor-age of a population of agents producing and con-suming trajectories, we expand the MATM cor-pus through two phases. Pre-population initial-izes the index from existing trajectory sources, and 

incremental update grows it as the producer and consumer agent population processes new training questions and contributes successful trajectories back to the shared memory. Both phases operate exclusively over the training partition. 

Pre-Population. The pre-population phase seeds an initial index D0 with publicly available trajecto-ries. For ALFWorld, we collect trajectories from a trained seq2seq model released by the bench-mark authors, supplemented by trajectories gener-ated by running Qwen3-32B and GPT-OSS 20B on the training set. For WebArena, we collect publicly available trajectories produced by GPT-4-Turbo, GPT-4-Turbo-Preview, and Claude-3.5-Sonnet from the official benchmark runs, again supplemented by Qwen3-32B and GPT-OSS 20B trajectories generated on the training set. In both cases, the collected trajectories are segmented into document chunks, encoded with the shared embed-ding function f , and inserted into the dense index 

D0, yielding 85,615 and 8,547 chunks for ALF-World and WebArena respectively. 

Incremental Update. After pre-population, MATM grows incrementally as the agent pop-ulation operates over a stream of new training questions. This phase serves a dual purpose. It enriches the index with trajectories from a diverse set of producer agents, and it simultaneously creates the supervision signals needed to train LTRT rerankers. The training questions are organized into par-titions {X p}Pp=1 processed sequentially. Within each partition, every question is assigned to a pro-ducer agent via a deterministic allocation function 

σ(x, A, p ) that ensures balanced coverage across task categories and agents (Appendix F). For each assigned pair (x, A n), the agent first attempts x

without retrieval to obtain a baseline trajectory 

Tbase and score sbase , which serves as the refer-ence point for downstream marginal-utility com-parisons. We then sample T branching points 

{t1, . . . , t T } randomly from the steps of Tbase . Fol-lowing Chang et al. (2015), at each branching point t, we roll in to the corresponding prefix 

ht = ( τ1, . . . , τ t) and retrieve the top-K chunks from the current index most similar to x combined with ht. We then roll out |I| one-shot trajectory-augmented generations from ht, one per selected rank j ∈ I ⊆ { 1, . . . , K }, scoring each resulting trajectory T (j) 

> t

as s(j) 

> t

.This loop produces two outputs simultaneously. Any trajectory meeting a quality threshold θ, in-cluding the baseline, is added to a trajectory buffer 

Bp. After all questions in Xp have been processed, every trajectory in Bp is segmented, embedded with 

f , and added to the index, yielding Dp.After all partitions are processed, the final MATM corpus contains 86,833 chunks for ALF-World and 20,102 chunks for WebArena (Ap-pendix G). 1 The full algorithm is given in Ap-pendix H. 

4.2 LTRT Dataset & Reranker Training 

The incremental construction procedure yields a la-beled training dataset S = {(q, d, ℓ )} for the LTRT reranker. For each retrieved chunk d(j) 

> t

evaluated at branching point t, we record the tuple (qt, d (j) 

> t

, ℓ )

with label ℓ = s(j) 

> t

− sbase , capturing the chunk’s marginal utility relative to the no-retrieval baseline. With Q = P 

> p

|X p| training questions, T branch-ing points per question, and |I| ranks evaluated per branching point, the resulting dataset contains 

Q × T × |I| labeled tuples. In our experiments, we used T = 2 for ALFWorld, T = 1 for WebArena. We sample rank positions I = {1, 5, 10 , 15 , 20 }

for both benchmarks, exposing the LTRT model to candidates across the full retrieval depth while avoiding the cost of generating all twenty labeled episodes. We compute 44 features per (q, d ) pair, span-ning the six categories introduced in §3.2. The full feature list is provided in Appendix I. We train three reranker families spanning common LTR paradigms: a pointwise feed-forward network (FFN), pairwise LambdaMART (Wu et al., 2010),  

> 1All trajectories are available at https://huggingface. co/datasets/toeunkim/matm-trajectories .

5and pairwise SVMRank (Joachims, 2006). 20% of the training set was used for the validation set for LTRT training. 

4.3 Inference-Time Configuration & Baselines 

Across both environments we use the E5-Base em-bedding model (Wang et al., 2022) as the shared embedding function f . Trajectory chunks span 

l = 5 action-observation steps under the key-value scheme. At inference time, a cascaded retrieval pipeline first retrieves the top 20 candidate trajec-tory chunks, after which an LTRT reranker selects the final top-1 chunk. The retrieval budget is there-fore 1: the working agent conditions on a single retrieved trajectory unit per retrieval call. 

Model Setups. We compare three configura-tions: a vanilla LLM without retrieval, MATM with single-stage dense retrieval only, and MATM with an LTRT reranker (LLM prompts in Ap-pendix M). RetrievalPlanner. Each consumer agent is equipped with a RetrievalPlanner LLM that decides, at each interaction step, whether to issue a retrieval call against MATM. This allows agents to call on shared memory selectively rather than on every step, which is important because indiscriminate retrieval can dilute the agent’s con-text with irrelevant guidance. Metrics. We eval-uate both task performance and efficiency. Task performance is measured by downstream success rate (SR) and efficiency by the number of inter-action steps per episode (# steps). To jointly cap-ture both dimensions, we adopt return-paired pref-erence (RPP) (Diaz, 2026), which measures the Pareto-dominance of trajectories between a can-didate model and a fixed baseline (Appendix B). Since consumer agents operate at population scale, unless specified, all reported metrics reflect aver-age performance across consumer models, referred to as consumer population welfare. 

5 Results 

We organize results around five research ques-tions: whether MATM augmentation improves the downstream effectiveness and efficiency of con-sumer agents (§5.1), whether a learned reranking model can further boost retrieval quality (§5.2), whether MATM retrieval benefit is exclusive to certain model groups or distributed across the pop-ulation (§5.3), whether MATM generalizes across task types (§5.4), and how consumer population performance scales with memory size (§5.5). 

5.1 MATM-Augmentation improves effectiveness and efficiency 

Table 1 summarizes results for ALFWorld and We-bArena under no-retrieval and single-stage retrieval from MATM. Across both benchmarks, retrieval from the shared repository consistently improves task outcomes. On ALFWorld, success rate increases from 47% to 55% (+8.0%p), while average steps per episode decrease from 11.77 to 11.18. The RPP score rises from −0.16 to −0.05 , indicating that the retrieval-augmented population more frequently Pareto-dominates the no-retrieval baseline in terms of the joint success-efficiency. On WebArena, success rate improves from 18% to 20% (+2%p), with average steps falling from 22.0 to 20.3 and RPP turning positive at 0.03. The improvement is more modest than ALFWorld, possibly due to WebArena’s longer task horizons and greater sen-sitivity to early-step errors. Together, these results show that a shared repository of heterogeneous agent trajectories improves consumer population welfare along both effectiveness and efficiency di-mensions. 

5.2 Learning to Rank Trajectories further improves MATM participants’ welfare 

Single-stage retrieval selects trajectories by em-bedding similarity alone. We next ask whether a learned reranker trained to predict downstream util-ity can improve over this baseline. We experiment with three reranker configurations: a feed-forward network (FFN), LambdaMART, and SVMRank. On ALFWorld, all three rerankers improve over single-stage retrieval, and SVMRank achieves the strongest results across all metrics: success rate reaches 64.3% (+9.2%p over single-stage, +17.2%p over no-retrieval), average steps fall to 10.35, and RPP rises to 0.15. On WebArena, reranker effectiveness is more moderate. FFN matches the success rate of single-stage retrieval at 20.5% while achieving the lowest step count (19.91) and highest RPP (0.04) among all meth-ods, making it the most effective reranker for that environment. LambdaMART, by contrast, reverts success rate to the no-retrieval level on WebArena, suggesting that the features it relies on are better calibrated to ALFWorld’s task structure than We-bArena’s. 6ALFWorld WebArena                                     

> Method SR ↑# steps ↓RPP ↑SR ↑# steps ↓RPP ↑
> no retrieval 0.4708 11.7664 -0.1586 0.1818 21.9886 -0.0511 single-stage 0.5511 11.1796 -0.0451 0.2045 20.2614 0.0284 rerank-FFN 0.5861 11.0336 -0.0046 0.2045 19.9091 0.0398
> rerank-LambdaMART 0.5715 10.8474 0.0608 0.1818 20.4205 -0.0341 rerank-SVMRank 0.6431 10.3453 0.1474 0.2045 20.2841 0.0170

Table 1: Evaluation of MATM-augmented agents in interactive environments. Success Rate (SR) and number of steps (# steps) are used for measuring the effectiveness and efficiency. Values are average of the five runs of randomized task-model allocation. 30 20 10 0 10 20 30     

> Capability gap
> 0.75
> 0.50
> 0.25
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> Retrieval advantage
> r= +0.09, p= 0.09
> n= 379 pairs

Figure 2: Retrieval Advantage vs. Producer-Consumer Capability Gap on ALFWorld with SVMRank reranking. Each point is one producer–consumer pair. 

5.3 MATM benefits are distributed across the agent population (Appendix K) 

While the previous sections establish that MATM improves average consumer welfare, they leave open whether that benefit is concentrated among particular producer-consumer pairings or dis-tributed across the population. To answer this, we measure two quantities for each (producer, con-sumer) pair: the retrieval advantage , defined as the gain in consumer success rate when retrieving from that producer relative to its no-retrieval baseline, and the capability gap , defined as the difference between the two agents’ aggregated benchmark scores (AAI (Artificial Analysis, 2026)). Higher the capability gap value, the producer is more ca-pable than the consumer. Figure 2 shows that consumers benefit from re-trieval regardless of whether the producer is weaker, comparable, or stronger than themselves, indicat-ing MATM’s value cannot be reduced to a single strong producer. Although the correlation between capability gap and retrieval advantage shows a slight positive trend — suggesting that stronger producers may yield marginally higher benefit — it remains small and insignificant across both bench-                          

> Retrieval Scope SR ↑# steps ↓RPP ↑
> ALFWorld (274) full 0.6460 10.2300 0.0566
> same task type 0.6314 10.4635 0.0055 cross task type 0.5985 10.7445 -0.0620
> WebArena (47) full 0.2979 19.0426 0.1383
> same task type 0.2766 19.1915 0.0000 cross task type 0.1915 19.0000 -0.1383

Table 2: MATM retrieval scope ablation results across three candidate pool restrictions. Number of tasks in parentheses. 

marks, indicating that retrieval utility is not primar-ily driven by producer-to-consumer competence transfer. Finally, reranking lifts the entire retrieval advantage distribution, confirming the finding in §5.2: on ALFWorld, SVMRank roughly doubles the mean retrieval advantage, and the same direc-tion of effect appears on WebArena under FFN reranking (Appendix K). 

5.4 MATM offers cross-task generalization 

We study how well MATM generalizes across tasks by varying the retrieval scope. We evaluate three conditions: (i) full retrieval places no restriction on the candidate pool; (ii) same-task retrieval limits candidates to trajectories from the same task type as the query; and (iii) cross-task retrieval limits candidates exclusively to trajectories from different task types (Appendix L). Table 2 shows that full retrieval achieves the highest SR and RPP in both environments, confirm-ing that unrestricted candidate diversity is benefi-cial. Two findings point to genuine cross-task gen-eralization. First, even under cross-task retrieval, ALFWorld SR reaches 59.9%, which remains well above the no-retrieval baseline of 47.1% from Ta-ble 1. This shows that trajectories from structurally different task types still carry transferable utility. Second, the effectiveness and efficiency gap be-tween full and same-task retrieval in both environ-ments suggests that restricting the candidate pool 710% 25% 50% 75% 100%     

> MATM Index Size (%)
> 0.475
> 0.500
> 0.525
> 0.550
> 0.575
> 0.600
> 0.625
> 0.650
> Success Rate
> ALFWorld: Scaling of MATM Index Size
> Success Rate
> no-retrieval
> Avg Steps
> 10.2
> 10.3
> 10.4
> 10.5
> 10.6
> 10.7
> 10.8
> 10.9
> Avg Steps per Episode 10% 25% 50% 75% 100%
> MATM Index Size (%)
> 0.185
> 0.190
> 0.195
> 0.200
> 0.205
> 0.210
> Success Rate
> WebArena: Scaling of MATM Index Size
> Success Rate
> no-retrieval
> Avg Steps
> 20.7
> 20.8
> 20.9
> 21.0
> 21.1
> 21.2
> 21.3
> Avg Steps per Episode

Figure 3: MATM memory scaling curves for ALFWorld (top) and WebArena (bottom). Success rate (left axis) and average steps per episode (right axis) as a function of index size. The dotted line marks SR of the no-retrieval baseline. Results are averaged over five runs with different random seeds. 

to same-type trajectories is itself a source of degra-dation, excluding useful candidates that happen to cross task boundaries. However, for both bench-marks, same-task retrieval outperforms cross-task retrieval, indicating that task-type alignment still carries a meaningful relevance signal. 

5.5 MATM scales with memory size 

We study how downstream effectiveness and effi-ciency change as MATM grows in size. We con-struct nested memory subsets at 10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of the full index, with each subset preserving producer model composition and bench-mark coverage to isolate the effect of memory size from shifts in data distribution. Each subset is constructed with five different random seeds and results are averaged across runs. Figure 3 shows the scaling curves for both envi-ronments. ALFWorld exhibits monotonic improve-ment in both success rate and step efficiency with index size, confirming that larger memory consis-tently benefits the agent. On WebArena, step ef-ficiency also decreases monotonically, consistent with ALFWorld. Success rate, however, exhibits a non-monotonic pattern: it dips at the 50% index before recovering sharply to 20.9% at full scale, the strongest result across all index sizes and the clearest margin above the no-retrieval baseline of 18.2%. We hypothesize that at intermediate scales, the index is large enough to surface plausible but ultimately unhelpful trajectories, yet not diverse enough to reliably include high-quality matches. At full scale, sufficient coverage overcomes this noise, restoring and exceeding the gains observed at smaller index sizes. 

6 Discussion 

Our results support the hypothesis that transac-tive memory provides a viable architecture for population-level agent memory. The results in §5.1 and §5.2 confirm that MATM with learned rerank-ing consistently improves consumer agent welfare in both effectiveness and efficiency. Our feature importance analysis (Appendix J) suggests that predictive signals for reranking ex-tend beyond retrieval-level similarity to include producer agent metadata such as benchmark scores that represents the producer agents’ capability. This reframes trajectory selection as, in part, a problem of producer trust modeling: the reranker learns to prefer trajectories from agents whose compe-tence profiles predict downstream utility for the consumer. However, feature importance concen-trates differently across environments — ALF-World relies heavily on a small set of producer features while WebArena distributes importance more evenly — which likely explains why no sin-gle reranker dominates both, and reinforces the need for retrieval systems that adapt to task struc-ture rather than a fixed ranking policy. The capability-gap analysis in §5.3 further shows that retrieval benefit is broadly distributed across the population rather than driven by transfer from stronger to weaker agents. This opens a natural future direction of per-consumer (group) person-alization of retrieval policy since the same shared repository may be optimally exploited differently by agents with different competence profiles and task preferences. The retrieval scope experiments in §5.4 provide direct evidence for why population-level memory is necessary. Trajectories from different task types carry transferable utility, and restricting the candi-date pool to same-type trajectories degrades perfor-8mance relative to unrestricted retrieval. This means that useful trajectories are not confined within task boundaries. They encode reusable patterns of in-teraction that generalize across tasks. An agent-specific or task-specific memory, by design, would exclude these candidates. MATM’s value lies in making them accessible. Our scaling experiments in §5.5 demonstrate that the value of MATM improves as the repository grows, suggesting that incentives or remuneration for producer contributions will be an important challenge for such platforms. 

7 Conclusion 

We introduced MATM, a shared population-level memory where heterogeneous agents contribute and retrieve trajectories to improve task perfor-mance. Retrieval improves effectiveness and ef-ficiency across the agent population regardless of capability, with reranking further amplifying gains. Retrieved trajectories generalize across task bound-aries and performance scales with memory size, suggesting shared artifact storage as a promising substrate for collective and continual intelligence among distributed agents. 

Limitations and Future Work 

Our experiments cover two interactive benchmarks (ALFWorld and WebArena) and a 34-model con-sumer population. While no single study can cover every environment or every model in a rapidly evolving landscape, this restricts the scope of our empirical claims. Our experiments and rerankers are also trained and evaluated within the same benchmark, so cross-benchmark reranker generalization remains untested. Also, the LTR dataset uses sparse rank sampling at positions 

I = {1, 5, 10 , 15 , 20 }, which does not fully cover the label distribution at all rank positions. This was a practical choice given experiment budget, and we found it to yield strong LTR learning perfor-mance with a favorable cost-quality tradeoff. Fi-nally, our work focuses entirely on the consumer side of MATM. Because MATM is fundamentally a two-sided market, evaluating producer-side welfare is equally important. Future work could draw on attribution fairness in RAG (Kim and Diaz, 2025) or marketplace evaluation frameworks (Kim et al., 2026) to address this gap. Relatedly, the current framework does not account for adversarial pro-ducers who may contribute malicious trajectories, potentially placing consumer agents at risk. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by NSF grant 2402874. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recom-mendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsors. 

References             

> A2A Protocol. 2026. Agent2agent (a2a) protocol.
> https://a2a-protocol.org . Accessed: 2026-05-26. Ammar Ahmed, Azal Ahmad Khan, Ayaan Ahmad, Sheng Di, Zirui Liu, and Ali Anwar. 2026. Retrieval-of-thought: Efficient reasoning via reusing thoughts. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Negar Arabzadeh, Wenjie Ma, Sewon Min, and Matei Zaharia. 2026. Rag over thinking traces can improve reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.03344 .Artificial Analysis. 2026. Artificial analysis. https: //artificialanalysis.ai .Accessed: 2026-05-25. Emma Brunskill and Lihong Li. 2013. Sample complex-ity of multi-task reinforcement learning. In Proceed-ings of the Twenty-Nineth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-13) . Association for Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. Zhe Cao, Tao Qin, Tie-Yan Liu, Ming-Feng Tsai, and Hang Li. 2007. Learning to rank: from pairwise approach to listwise approach. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning ,pages 129–136. Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan Zhang. 2023. Quantifying memorization across neural lan-guage models. In The Eleventh International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Kai-Wei Chang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agar-wal, Hal Daumé III, and John Langford. 2015. Learn-ing to search better than your teacher. In Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2058– 2066. PMLR. Zijian Chen, Xueguang Ma, Shengyao Zhuang, Jimmy Lin, Akari Asai, and Victor Zhong. 2026. Agentir: Reasoning-aware retrival for deep research agents.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04384 .Marc-Alexandre Côté, Ákos Kádár, Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine, James Moore, Ruo Yu Tao, Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud Adada, Wendy Tay, and Adam Trischler. 2018. Textworld: A learning environment for text-based games. CoRR , abs/1806.11532.

9T. Cover and P. Hart. 1967. Nearest neighbor pattern classification. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 13(1):21–27. Yufan Dang, Chen Qian, Xueheng Luo, Jingru Fan, Zihao Xie, Ruijie Shi, Weize Chen, Cheng Yang, Xiaoyin Che, Ye Tian, Xuantang Xiong, Lei Han, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2025. Multi-agent collaboration via evolving orchestration. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems .Rajarshi Das, Manzil Zaheer, Dung Thai, Ameya God-bole, Ethan Perez, Jay Yoon Lee, Lizhen Tan, Lazaros Polymenakos, and Andrew McCallum. 2021. Case-based reasoning for natural language queries over knowledge bases. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9594–9611. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Fernando Diaz. 2026. Offline preference-based trajec-tory evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.17541 .Wenqi Fan, Yujuan Ding, Liangbo Ning, Shijie Wang, Hengyun Li, Dawei Yin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Qing Li. 2024. A survey on rag meeting llms: Towards retrieval-augmented large language models. In Pro-ceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 6491– 6501. Francisco M. Garcia, Bruno Castro da Silva, and Philip S. Thomas. 2019. A compression-inspired framework for macro discovery. In Proceed-ings of the 18th International Conference on Au-tonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , AAMAS ’19, page 1973–1975. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. Thorsten Joachims. 2006. Training linear svms in linear time. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 217–226. Minki Kang, Jongwon Jeong, Seanie Lee, Jaewoong Cho, and Sung Ju Hwang. 2026. Distilling LLM agent into small models with retrieval and code tools. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 .Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2020. Generalization through Memorization: Nearest Neighbor Language Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .To Eun Kim and Fernando Diaz. 2025. Towards fair rag: On the impact of fair ranking in retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 International ACM SIGIR Conference on Innovative Concepts and Theories in Information Retrieval (ICTIR) , ICTIR ’25, page 33–43. Association for Computing Machin-ery. To Eun Kim, Alireza Salemi, Andrew Drozdov, Fer-nando Diaz, and Hamed Zamani. 2024. Retrieval-enhanced machine learning: Synthesis and opportu-nities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12982 .To Eun Kim, Alireza Salemi, Hamed Zamani, and Fernando Diaz. 2026. Evaluation of agents under simulated ai marketplace dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.14256 .Martin Klissarov, Mikael Henaff, Roberta Raileanu, Sh-agun Sodhani, Pascal Vincent, Amy Zhang, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Doina Precup, Marlos C. Machado, and Pierluca D’Oro. 2025. Maestromotif: Skill design from artificial intelligence feedback. In The Thir-teenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Janet L. Kolodner. 1992. An introduction to case-based reasoning. Artificial Intelligence Review , 6(1):3–34. George Konidaris and Andrew Barto. 2007. Building portable options: skill transfer in reinforcement learn-ing. In Proceedings of the 20th international joint conference on Artifical intelligence , IJCAI’07, pages 895–900. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. John E. Laird, Allen Newell, and Paul S. Rosenbloom. 1987. Soar: An architecture for general intelligence. 

Artificial Intelligence , 33(1):1–64. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459– 9474. Ming Li, Xirui Li, and Tianyi Zhou. 2026. Does Social-ization Emerge in AI Agent Society? A Case Study of Moltbook. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2602.14299 [cs]. Yang Li, Youssef Emad, Karthik Padthe, Jack Lan-chantin, Weizhe Yuan, Thao Nguyen, Jason E We-ston, Shang-Wen Li, Dong Wang, Ilia Kulikov, and Xian Li. 2025. Naturalthoughts: Selecting and dis-tilling reasoning traces for general reasoning tasks. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Efficient Reasoning .Yuan Liang, Ruobin Zhong, Haoming Xu, Chen Jiang, Yi Zhong, Runnan Fang, Jia-Chen Gu, Shumin Deng, Yunzhi Yao, Mengru Wang, and 1 others. 2026. Skill-net: Create, evaluate, and connect ai skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04448 .Long-Ji Lin. 1992. Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learning, planning and teach-ing. Machine Learning , 8(3):293–321. 

10 Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord, Niket Tandon, Li Zhang, Chris Callison-Burch, and Peter Clark. 2024. CLIN: A continually learning language agent for rapid task adaptation and generalization. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Model Context Protocol. 2026. Model context pro-tocol. https://modelcontextprotocol.io . Ac-cessed: 2026-05-26. Niklas Muennighoff, Zitong Yang, Weijia Shi, Xi-ang Lisa Li, Li Fei-Fei, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke Zettlemoyer, Percy Liang, Emmanuel Candes, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2025. s1: Simple test-time scaling. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 20275–20321. Association for Computational Linguistics. Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I-Hung Hsu, Yanfei Chen, Ke Jiang, Zifeng Wang, Rujun Han, Long Le, Samira Daruki, Xiangru Tang, Vishy Tirumalashetty, George Lee, Mahsan Rofouei, Hangfei Lin, Jiawei Han, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. 2026. Reasoning-bank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning memory. In The Fourteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Alireza Salemi and Hamed Zamani. 2024a. Evaluating retrieval quality in retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SI-GIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’24, page 2395–2400. Association for Computing Machinery. Alireza Salemi and Hamed Zamani. 2024b. Towards a search engine for machines: Unified ranking for multiple retrieval-augmented large language models. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SI-GIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’24, page 741–751. As-sociation for Computing Machinery. Haizhou Shi, Zihao Xu, Hengyi Wang, Weiyi Qin, Wenyuan Wang, Yibin Wang, Zifeng Wang, Sayna Ebrahimi, and Hao Wang. 2025. Continual learning of large language models: A comprehensive survey. 

ACM Computing Surveys , 58(5):1–42. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. 2020. ALFRED: A Benchmark for Interpreting Grounded Instructions for Everyday Tasks. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. 2021. {ALFW}orld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In 

International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Khanh-Tung Tran, Dung Dao, Minh-Duong Nguyen, Quoc-Viet Pham, Barry O’Sullivan, and Hoang D. Nguyen. 2025. Multi-Agent Collaboration Mecha-nisms: A Survey of LLMs. ArXiv:2501.06322 [cs]. Vivek Veeriah, Tom Zahavy, Matteo Hessel, Zhongwen Xu, Junhyuk Oh, Iurii Kemaev, Hado P van Hasselt, David Silver, and Satinder Singh. 2021. Discovery of options via meta-learned subgoals. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:29861– 29873. Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2024. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research .Jiayu Wang, Yifei Ming, Zixuan Ke, Shafiq Joty, Aws Albarghouthi, and Frederic Sala. 2026. SkillOrches-tra: Learning to Route Agents via Skill Transfer. 

arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2602.19672 [cs]. Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. 2022. Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03533 .Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva Gandhi, Graham Neubig, and Daniel Fried. 2025a. Inducing programmatic skills for agentic tasks. In Second Conference on Language Modeling .Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. 2025b. Agent workflow memory. Daniel M Wegner. 1987. Transactive memory: A con-temporary analysis of the group mind. In Theories of group behavior , pages 185–208. Springer. Sean Welleck, Amanda Bertsch, Matthew Finlayson, Hailey Schoelkopf, Alex Xie, Graham Neubig, Ilia Kulikov, and Zaid Harchaoui. 2024. From decoding to meta-generation: Inference-time algorithms for large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Survey Certification. Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordes. 2015. Memory networks. In Proceedings of the Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Qiang Wu, Christopher JC Burges, Krysta M Svore, and Jianfeng Gao. 2010. Adapting boosting for in-formation retrieval measures. Information Retrieval ,13:254–270. Yangzhen Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Shanda Li, Sean Welleck, and Yiming Yang. 2024. Scaling inference com-putation: Compute-optimal inference for problem-solving with language models. In The 4th Workshop on Mathematical Reasoning and AI at NeurIPS’24 .

11 Ling Yang, Zhaochen Yu, Tianjun Zhang, Shiyi Cao, Minkai Xu, Wentao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Bin CUI. 2024. Buffer of thoughts: Thought-augmented reasoning with large language models. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Ling Yang, Zhaochen Yu, Tianjun Zhang, Minkai Xu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Bin CUI, and Shuicheng YAN. 2025. Supercorrect: Advancing small LLM rea-soning with thought template distillation and self-correction. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2023. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In         

> Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Hamed Zamani, Fernando Diaz, Mostafa Dehghani, Donald Metzler, and Michael Bendersky. 2022. Retrieval-enhanced machine learning. In Proceed-ings of the 45th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation Retrieval .Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. 2024. Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 38, pages 19632–19642. Longtao Zheng, Rundong Wang, Xinrun Wang, and Bo An. 2024. Synapse: Trajectory-as-exemplar prompting with memory for computer control. In
> The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Gra-ham Neubig. 2024. Webarena: A realistic web en-vironment for building autonomous agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .

A Unabridged Related Work 

A.1 Memory-Augmented Agents 

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020), an instance of Retrieval-Enhanced Machine Learning (Zamani et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2024), enhances language models by conditioning generation on retrieved external context, most com-monly human-authored documents such as web pages or knowledge bases (Fan et al., 2024). Re-cent extensions of this paradigm treat an agent’s own interaction history as retrievable context, giv-ing rise to memory-augmented generation, where past conversations or execution traces are indexed and reused to guide future behavior (Shinn et al., 2023; Majumder et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024). MATM fits within this retrieval- and memory-augmented paradigm but differs in both content and scope: instead of retrieving web documents or single-agent’s local history, MATM indexes agent-generated trajectories and treats memory as a population-level resource shared across agents, where agents can contribute to and retrieve from the shared repository. 

A.2 Reuse of Agent Artifacts 

Modern reasoning agents, particularly those em-ploying high inference-time scaling, generate rich intermediate artifacts during problem solving. These include low-level action-observation trajec-tories and thinking traces, as well as higher-level plans, strategies, workflows, and reusable code which are anologous to the notion of options in re-inforcement learning (Garcia et al., 2019; Veeriah et al., 2021). These agent artifacts can be leveraged to improve inference efficiency, generalization, and continual adaptation. At the trajectory level, prior work has explored reusing reasoning or action-observation trajectories as in-context guidance. Buffer of Thoughts (Yang et al., 2024) maintains and retrieves reasoning tem-plates to guide new problem instances, while Re-trieval of Thought (Ahmed et al., 2026) constructs thought templates on the fly by retrieving prior rea-soning trajectories. For action-observation trajecto-ries, Zheng et al. (2024) and Zhao et al. (2024) reuse environment interaction trajectories as in-context examples to improve downstream decision-making. Beyond the trajectory level, several works ex-tract and reuse more abstract artifacts such as plans, strategies, workflows, and skills. CLIN (Ma-jumder et al., 2024) stores textual causal abstrac-tions to support continual improvement. Agent Workflow Memory (Wang et al., 2025b) distills reusable workflows from web interaction trajec-tories, and MaestroMotif (Klissarov et al., 2025) induces reusable skills via reinforcement learning. ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2026) retrieves strategy-level reasoning patterns to guide prob-lem solving. Arabzadeh et al. (2026) transform math reasoning thinking trajectories into higher level structures and use them as retrievable objects. Applied to a programming domain, Wang et al. (2025a) enable agents to induce, verify, and reuse program-based skills on the fly in web-based tasks, 12 while Voyager (Wang et al., 2024) maintains a growing library of executable code for open-ended task execution. In a concurrent work, SkillNet (Liang et al., 2026) assembles a collection of skills contributed by multiple agents, framing skill accu-mulation as a system-design problem. Collectively, these works frame artifact reuse as a mechanism for accumulating reusable competence over time. Agent artifacts can also serve as supervision sig-nals for model distillation. SuperCorrect (Yang et al., 2025) extracts thought templates from a teacher model to guide smaller models during rea-soning. Related approaches similarly distill struc-tured reasoning artifacts to transfer competence across models (Li et al., 2025; Kang et al., 2026). In these settings, artifacts function not only as inference-time memory but also as compressed rep-resentations of reasoning expertise. While these systems reuse different types of agent artifacts, such artifacts are typically reused only by the same or homogeneous agent(s) that produced them, with less consideration of emerg-ing society of agents (Li et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2026). As a result, valuable experience remains isolated, and newly instantiated agents repeatedly rediscover solutions that already existed elsewhere in the other systems. In contrast, MATM proposes a population-level 

artifact repository. Rather than treating artifacts as private, per-agent memory, we model them as shared, structured resources that heterogeneous agents can both contribute to and retrieve from. This shifts artifact reuse from an individual opti-mization mechanism to a collective knowledge in-frastructure, enabling continual learning and cross-agent transfer, reducing redundant exploration, and supporting cumulative capability growth at the ecosystem level. The most closely related con-current work, SkillNet (Liang et al., 2026), also as-sembles a collection of skills across heterogeneous agents. However, it primarily addresses system de-sign and does not evaluate the benefit of retrieval for consumer agents in a population setting, nor does it provide in-depth analysis of artifact reposi-tory search. 

B Return-Paired Preference (Diaz, 2026) 

Given a set of n tasks and two agents—a control or baseline agent A and a treatment agent A′—we have a set of n trajectories for each agent. For a task, we say that A′ is preferred to A if A′ is                                                                           

> Model Producer Consumer
> trained-seq2seq Aopenai/gpt-4-turbo Wopenai/gpt-4-turbo-preview Wanthropic/claude-3.5-sonnet Wopenai/gpt-oss-20b AW AW openai/gpt-oss-120b AW AW openai/gpt-5.4 AW AW openai/gpt-5.4-nano AW AW anthropic/claude-3-haiku AW AW anthropic/claude-sonnet-4.6 AW AW anthropic/claude-opus-4 AW AW anthropic/claude-opus-4.6 AW AW google/gemini-2.5-flash-lite AW AW google/gemini-2.5-flash AW AW google/gemini-2.5-pro AW AW google/gemma-4-31b-it AW AW meta-llama/llama-3.1-8b-instruct AW AW meta-llama/llama-3.2-3b-instruct AW AW meta-llama/llama-3.3-70b-instruct AW AW meta-llama/llama-4-maverick AW AW deepseek/deepseek-r1 AW AW deepseek/deepseek-r1-0528 AW AW deepseek/deepseek-chat-v3.1 AW AW deepseek/deepseek-v3.2 AW AW qwen/qwen3-32b AW AW qwen/qwen3-235b-a22b AW AW qwen/qwen3-max AW AW qwen/qwen3.5-flash-02-23 AW AW x-ai/grok-3-mini AW AW x-ai/grok-4-fast AW AW x-ai/grok-4.1-fast AW AW x-ai/grok-4.20 AW AW z-ai/glm-4.5 AW AW z-ai/glm-5 AW AW minimax/minimax-m1 AW AW minimax/minimax-m2 AW AW mistralai/ministral-14b-2512 AW AW mistralai/mistral-large-2512 AW AW

Table 3: Producer and consumer agents across ALF-World (A) and WebArena (W). AW indicates the model serves in that role for both environments. 

successful and A is not or, if both are successful, 

A′ reaches the success in fewer steps; similarly, A

is preferred to A′ if A is successful while A′ is not or if it faster to success if both are successful. In all other situations, we say that there is no preference between A′ and A for that task. If the value of the preference is 1 when A′ is preferred, −1 when A is preferred, and 0 if there is no preference, then the return-paired preference metric for agent A′ is the 

mean preference value over all n tasks compared with all other agents. 

C Population of LLM Agents 

Table 3 shows the list of agents used as a population in each benchmark. 13 D ALFWorld Description 

ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021) contains interac-tive TextWorld environments (Côté et al., 2018) that parallel embodied worlds in the ALFRED dataset (Shridhar et al., 2020). The aligned environ-ments allow agents to reason and learn high-level policies in an abstract space before solving embod-ied tasks through low-level actuation. ALFWorld translates complex household tasks such as finding, cleaning, heating, or placing objects into textual observations and actions, allowing researchers to train and evaluate agents using natural language rather than raw visual input. The dataset consists of 3553 tasks for training and a heldout test set of 274 tasks. The tasks are grouped into 6 task types: Pick & Place, Examine in Light, Clean & Place, Heat & Place, Cool & Place, Pick Two & Place. Within each task category there is significant variation: the embodied environment includes 120 rooms (30 kitchens, 30 bedrooms, 30 bathrooms, 30 living rooms), each dynamically populated with a set of portable objects (e.g., apple, mug), and static receptacles (e.g., microwave, fridge). For interaction, TextWorld environments allow 9 high-level actions such as ’open’, ’heat’, etc. For our experiments, we use the 3553 training episodes for populating MATM memory, and a sampled repre-sentative subset of 355 episodes for generating data for training LTRT rerankers. We use the heldout 274 episodes as the test set. 

E WebArena Description 

WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024) is a standalone, self-hostable web environment for building autonomous agents. WebArena creates websites from five pop-ular categories (Ecommerce platforms, Social Fo-rums, Maps, Content Management Systems and Collaborative Development Platforms for software development) with functionality and data mimick-ing their real-world equivalents. The dataset con-sists of 812 examples consisting of high-level natu-ral language instructions that require interaction with the WebArena environment to solve. The dataset was created by curating realistic intents to carry out complex and creative tasks within We-bArena. Annotators were guided to spend a few minutes exploring the websites to familiarize them-selves with the websites’ content and functionali-ties. Then the annotators are tasked with intent for-mulation. At the end, 241 intents were curated and 812 tasks were created with different instantiations 

> Figure 4: The intent distribution across different web-sites for WebArena

of these intents. Figure 4 shows the distribution of intents accross different sites. For our experiments, the test set comprised of 88 tasks sampled from the total 812 tasks while maintaining the distribution of intents. We treated the leftover 724 tasks as training data for populating MATM memory, and used a subset of 58 episodes for generating LTRT training data. In the end, our test set consisted of 88 tasks. 

F Task Allocation Function 

To ensure that every model in the population pro-duces trajectories across all task categories, we employ a task-type-aware stratified round-robin 

assignment with an offset. Given a partition Xp,questions are first grouped into buckets by task type (e.g., Algebra, Geometry, Precalculus for mathe-matical problem solving, or task categories for in-teractive benchmarks), and each bucket is sorted in a deterministic order. Within each bucket, ques-tions are assigned to agents by cycling through the ordered population A1, A 2, . . . , A N in round-robin fashion, starting at an offset o ∈ { 0, . . . , N −1}.The offset shifts the starting agent but does not change the bucket composition, ensuring that dif-ferent offset values produce complementary assign-ments across agents. 

G MATM Index Statistics 

Table 4 shows the size of MATM index across en-vironments. 

H Incremental Construction of MATM & LTRT Dataset 

Algorithm 1 describes formal procedure of incre-mental construction of MATM index and LTRT 14 Algorithm 1 Incremental MATM & LTRT Dataset Construction 

Require: Agent population A, question partitions X1, . . . , XP , pre-warmed index D0, retrieval depth 

K, rank positions I ⊆ { 1, . . . , K }, branching points per question T , allocation σ, evaluator EVAL ,quality threshold θ, embedding function f

Ensure: Updated MATM index DP and LTRT dataset S 

> 1:

S ← ∅ ▷ LTRT Dataset  

> 2:

for p = 1 , . . . , P do ▷ Process each partition  

> 3:

Bp ← ∅ ▷ Trajectory buffer  

> 4:

for each question x ∈ X p do  

> 5:

An ← σ(x, A, p ) ▷ Assign agent  

> 6:

(Tbase , ˆybase ) ← An(x) ▷ Baseline trajectory without retrieval  

> 7:

sbase ← EVAL (ˆ ybase , x ) ▷ Reference score for marginal utility  

> 8:

if sbase ≥ θ then  

> 9:

Bp ← B p ∪ {T base } 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

Sample {t1, . . . , t T } ⊆ { 1, . . . , |T base |} uniformly at random ▷ Branching points  

> 12:

for t ∈ { t1, . . . , t T } do ▷ Roll-in to step t of Tbase  

> 13:

ht ← (τ1, . . . , τ t) from Tbase  

> 14:

qt, (d(1)  

> t

,. . . ,d (K) 

> t

) ← RETRIEVE (x, h t, Dp−1, K ) 

> 15:

for j ∈ I do ▷ Roll-out: one-shot augmented generation per rank  

> 16:

(T (j) 

> t

, ˆy(j) 

> t

) ← An(x | ht, d (j) 

> t

) 

> 17:

s(j) 

> t

← EVAL (ˆ y(j) 

> t

, x ) 

> 18:

if s(j) 

> t

≥ θ then  

> 19:

Bp ← B p ∪ {T (j) 

> t

} ▷ Add successful trajectory  

> 20:

end if  

> 21:

S ← S ∪ { (qt, d (j) 

> t

, s (j) 

> t

− sbase )} ▷ Marginal utility label  

> 22:

end for  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

end for  

> 25:

Dp ← INDEX UPDATE (Dp−1, Bp, f ) ▷ Chunk, embed, add  

> 26:

end for 

dataset for trajectory reranker training. 

I Learning-To-Rank Features 

Table 5 shows the complete list of learning-to-rank features used across environments. 

J Feature Importance Test of the Trained Learning-To-Rank Trajectories (LTRT) Model 

Table 6 shows the top ten most important features for both benchmarks. 

K Extended Results of Section §5.3 

K.1 Formalism 

We formalize the analysis of §5.3 as follows. With some abuse of notation, let P denote the set of pro-ducer agents and C the set of consumer agents, with 

X the set of evaluation tasks. For a consumer c ∈ C ,let μ0(c) ∈ [0 , 1] denote its average final score on 

X without retrieval, and let μr(p, c ) ∈ [0 , 1] denote its average final score on episodes where producer 

p ∈ P appeared among the retrieved source models. The retrieval advantage of the pair (p, c ) is 

μα(p, c ) = μr(p, c ) − μ0(c),

the gain in consumer success rate attributable to re-trieving from producer p relative to that consumer’s own no-retrieval baseline. Each agent i ∈ P ∪ C has a standalone capability 

κ(i), measured by its aggregated Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index score (Artificial Analysis, 2026). The capability gap of a producer-consumer pair is 

κα(p, c ) = κ(p) − κ(c),

which is positive when the producer is stronger than the consumer in standalone capability, zero when 15 Producer Agents # chunks %

trained-seq2seq 67,570 77.82% Qwen3-32B 11,264 12.97% GPT-OSS 20B 6,781 7.81% DeepSeek-V3.2 85 0.10% MiniMax-M1 68 0.08% Qwen3.5-Flash 68 0.08% Claude Sonnet 4.6 66 0.08% GLM-4.5 63 0.07% DeepSeek-R1 59 0.07% Claude Opus 4 54 0.06% MiniMax-M2 54 0.06% Gemini 2.5 Flash 52 0.06% DeepSeek-Chat-V3.1 52 0.06% Qwen3-Max 50 0.06% Grok-4-Fast 45 0.05% Gemini 2.5 Pro 41 0.05% Grok-4.1-Fast 39 0.04% Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite 36 0.04% GLM-5 35 0.04% Mistral Large 2512 34 0.04% Gemma-4-31B 33 0.04% Claude Opus 4.6 32 0.04% Ministral-14B 30 0.03% DeepSeek-R1-0528 30 0.03% Qwen3-235B-A22B 29 0.03% Grok-4.20 27 0.03% Llama-3.3-70B 24 0.03% GPT-OSS 120B 23 0.03% Llama-4-Maverick 23 0.03% Grok-3-Mini 21 0.02% Claude 3 Haiku 17 0.02% GPT-5.4 12 0.01% GPT-5.4-Nano 9 0.01% Llama-3.1-8B 7 0.01% 

Total (34) 86,833 100% 

(a) ALFWorld 

Producer Agents # chunks (%) GPT-4-Turbo 2,222 11.05% GPT-4-Turbo-Preview 2,054 10.22% Claude 3.5 Sonnet 1,673 8.32% Qwen3-32B 1,500 7.46% GPT-OSS 20B 1,098 5.46% DeepSeek-R1-0528 1,040 5.17% Claude Opus 4 982 4.89% MiniMax-M1 804 4.00% Claude Sonnet 4.6 801 3.98% Claude Opus 4.6 725 3.61% DeepSeek-R1 674 3.35% Gemini 2.5 Flash 673 3.35% GLM-5 577 2.87% Llama-4-Maverick 442 2.20% Grok-4.1-Fast 437 2.17% Grok-4.20 431 2.14% Qwen3.5-Flash 411 2.04% DeepSeek-V3.2 404 2.01% GPT-5.4 388 1.93% GLM-4.5 342 1.70% GPT-5.4-Nano 306 1.52% MiniMax-M2 289 1.44% Grok-4-Fast 262 1.30% Qwen3-Max 246 1.22% Qwen3-235B-A22B 224 1.11% Gemini 2.5 Pro 217 1.08% Grok-3-Mini 203 1.01% GPT-OSS 120B 158 0.79% DeepSeek-Chat-V3.1 139 0.69% Gemma-4-31B 118 0.59% Mistral Large 2512 116 0.58% GPT-4-1106-Preview 89 0.44% Llama-3.1-8B 22 0.11% Llama-3.3-70B 20 0.10% Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite 11 0.05% Claude 3 Haiku 4 0.02% 

Total (36) 20,102 100% 

(b) WebArena 

Table 4: MATM index statistics across benchmarks. 

they are matched, and negative when the producer is weaker. 30 20 10 0 10 20 30                                   

> Capability gap
> 0.75
> 0.50
> 0.25
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> Retrieval advantage
> r= +0.04, p= 0.49
> n= 347 pairs
> Single-stage Retrieval
> 30 20 10 010 20 30
> Capability gap
> r= +0.09, p= 0.09
> n= 379 pairs
> SVMRank Reranking
> ALFWorld: Retrieval Advantage vs. Producer-Consumer Capability Gap 30 20 10 010 20 30
> Capability gap
> 0.75
> 0.50
> 0.25
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> Retrieval advantage
> r= +0.03, p= 0.79
> n= 115 pairs
> Single-stage Retrieval
> 30 20 10 010 20 30
> Capability gap
> r= +0.08, p= 0.35
> n= 128 pairs
> FFN Reranking
> WebArena: Retrieval Advantage vs. Producer-Consumer Capability Gap

Figure 5: Retrieval Advantage vs. Producer-Consumer Capability Gap for ALFWorld (top) and WebArena (bot-tom). 

K.2 Full results 

Figure 5 shows μα plotted against κα for ALF-World and WebArena, with the best-performing reranker for each environment shown alongside the corresponding single-stage baseline. Across both benchmarks and both retrieval settings, the Pear-son correlation between κα and μα is small and not statistically significant: r = +0 .04 (p = 0 .49 )for ALFWorld single-stage retrieval, r = +0 .09 

(p = 0 .09 ) for ALFWorld with SVMRank rerank-ing, r = +0 .03 (p = 0 .79 ) for WebArena single-

Category Features (# features: 44) 

Producer Agent Info (#: 13) agent ID context-window agent benchmark scores (11 features): Artificial Analysis Intelligence (AAI) Index GDPval-AA 

τ 2-Bench Telecom Terminal-Bench Hard SciCode AA-LCR AA-Omniscience Accuracy IFBench Humanity’s Last Exam (HLE) GPQA-Diamond CritPt Consumer Agent Info (#: 1) agent ID 1st Stage Retrieval (#: 1) 1st stage retrieval score Query Features (#: 2) query length current step number Trajectory Features (#: 4) retrieved chunk length number of steps in trajectory success flag trajectory length Query–Trajectory Interaction Features (#: 23) unigram text tfidf cosine similarity unigram goal tfidf cosine similarity unigram state tfidf cosine similarity unigram context tfidf cosine similarity bigram text tfidf cosine similarity bigram goal tfidf cosine similarity bigram state tfidf cosine similarity bigram context tfidf cosine similarity text overlap ratio goal overlap ratio state overlap ratio context overlap ratio text jaccard similarity goal jaccard similarity state jaccard similarity context jaccard similarity text embedding similarity goal embedding similarity state embedding similarity context embedding similarity task match task variation match step number difference 

Table 5: Features used for Learning-To-Rank Trajecto-ries (LTRT). 

stage retrieval, and r = +0 .08 (p = 0 .35 ) for WebArena with FFN reranking. Reranking consistently lifts the retrieval advan-tage distribution. On ALFWorld, the mean μα rises from +0 .05 under single-stage retrieval to +0 .1

under SVMRank, and the fraction of pairs with 

μα > 0 rises from 51% to 61% . On WebArena, the conditional means follow the same pattern: pairs where the producer is stronger than the consumer show a mean μα of +0 .02 under both single-stage and FFN reranking, while the overall distribution shifts upward under reranking. The correlation between κα and μα also roughly doubles under reranking in both environments, from r ≈ 0.03 to 

r ≈ 0.08 . While neither correlation reaches sta-tistical significance, their consistency across two independent benchmarks and two retrieval settings indicates a real but small structural effect: rerank-ing incorporates producer-capability information as one signal among many, consistent with the feature importance analysis in §5.2. 

L Section §5.4 Supplement 

For ALFWorld, we adopt the six task types de-fined in the original benchmark; for WebArena, the 241 task intents. Because WebArena’s task space 16 Benchmark Rank Feature Name Feature Category Feature Importance 

AlfWorld 1 SciCode score Producer Agent Info 0.0596 AlfWorld 2 number of steps in trajectory Trajectory Features -0.0514 AlfWorld 3 AAI score Producer Agent Info 0.0368 AlfWorld 4 HLE score Producer Agent Info -0.0233 AlfWorld 5 GPQA-Diamond score Producer Agent Info -0.0230 AlfWorld 6 state overlap ratio Query–Trajectory Interaction 0.0188 AlfWorld 7 GDPval-AA score Producer Agent Info 0.0185 AlfWorld 8 τ 2-Bench Telecom score Producer Agent Info -0.0168 AlfWorld 9 retrieved chunk length Trajectory Features 0.0156 AlfWorld 10 IFBench score Producer Agent Info -0.0155 WebArena 1 AA-LCR score Producer Agent Info 0.0069 WebArena 2 IFBench score Producer Agent Info 0.0063 WebArena 3 number steps in trajectory Trajectory Features 0.0044 WebArena 4 state embedding similarity Query–Trajectory Interaction 0.0036 WebArena 5 goal overlap ratio Query–Trajectory Interaction 0.0032 WebArena 6 GPQA-Diamond score Producer Agent Info 0.0028 WebArena 7 retrieved chunk length Trajectory Features 0.0024 WebArena 8 CritPt score Producer Agent Info 0.0021 WebArena 9 current step number Query Features 0.0020 WebArena 10 bigram text tfidf cosine similarity Query–Trajectory Interaction 0.0019 

Table 6: Top feature rankings for LTRT model on each benchmark. SVMRank for ALFWorld and FFN for WebArena. For SVMRank, we report the feature importance as the weight learnt for SVMRank. For FFN, we compute feature importance by removing the feature and measuring the drop in NDCG@10 score while training the LTRT reranker. 

is fine-grained, some test tasks have no same-type candidates in the index; we exclude such tasks from the WebArena experiments, leaving 47 tasks for this analysis. All results use the best-performing reranker per environment: SVMRank for ALF-World and FFN for WebArena. RPP in this section is computed relative to full retrieval, so negative RPP values indicate underperformance relative to the full-scope condition. 17 M Language Model Prompts 

M.1 Retrieval Planner Prompt 

SYSTEM 

You are a retrieval planner for an agent. Decide if a new retrieval of a successful trajectory is needed now. Consider the goal, recent observations, and the current retrieved trajectory context. Focus on identifying if the current situation is similar to the retrieved trajectory. If the current situation and recent history is similar to the retrieved trajectory, return [NoRetrieval]. If the current situation and recent history is not similar to the retrieved trajectory, return [Retrieval]. 

USER 

{"goal": "<goal_text>", "current_observation": "<observation>", "recent_history": "<recent_history_str>", "current_retrieved_context": "<trajectory_context>" }Return only one of these exact tags: [Retrieval] or [NoRetrieval]. Do not include any other text. 

M.2 ALFWorld Baseline (no-retrieval) Prompt 

Note that the ‘ONE-SHOT EXAMPLE’ used in this section is an illustrative example; the prompts are adjusted based on the task. 

SYSTEM 

Interact with a household to solve a task. Imagine you are an intelligent agent in a household environment and your target is to perform actions to complete the task goal. At the beginning of your interactions, you will be given the detailed description of the current environment and your goal to accomplish. For each of your turn, you will be given the observation of the last turn. Think step by step about what you observe and what action to take next. The available actions are: 1. go to recep 2. take obj from recep 3. put obj in/on recep 4. open recep 5. close recep 6. toggle obj recep 7. clean obj with recep 8. heat obj with recep 9. cool obj with recep where obj and recep correspond to objects and receptacles. After your each turn, the environment will give you immediate feedback based on which you plan your next few steps. if the envrionment output "Nothing happened", that means the previous action is invalid and you should try more options. Reminder: 1. The action must be chosen from the given available actions. Any actions except provided available actions will be regarded as illegal. 2. Think when necessary, try to act directly more in the process. RESPONSE FORMAT: For each turn, you must provide your response in JSON format with two fields: - reasoning: MUST start with ‘Let’s think step by step.’ followed by detailed reasoning about the situation and why this action is the best choice - action: your chosen action (must be exactly from admissible_actions list) CRITICAL RULES: 1. Your action MUST be character-for-character identical to one item in admissible_actions 2. Do NOT modify, abbreviate, or paraphrase actions 3. Do NOT use actions from retrieved trajectories unless they appear in current admissible_actions 4. If confused, pick a safe exploratory action like "look" or navigation ONE-SHOT EXAMPLE: Task: clean some apple and put it in sidetable. Turn 1: Observation: The fridge 1 is closed. Response: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. I should open fridge 1 to see what’s inside.", "action": "open fridge 1"} 

18 Turn 2: Observation: You open the fridge 1. The fridge 1 is open. In it, you see a lettuce 2, a mug 2, a potato 2, and a tomato 1. Response: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. I need to navigate to diningtable 1 to continue searching or complete the task.", "action": "go to diningtable 1"} Turn 3: Observation: On the diningtable 1, you see nothing. Response: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. I need to navigate to diningtable 2 to continue searching or complete the task.", "action": "go to diningtable 2"} [TURNS SKIPPED FOR READABILITY] Turn 11: Observation: On the sinkbasin 1, you see a cup 2, a egg 1, a mug 1, and a potato 3. Response: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. I need to clean this object as required by the task.", "action": "clean apple 3 with sinkbasin 1"} Turn 12: Observation: You clean the apple 3 using the sinkbasin 1. Response: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. Now I clean an apple (3). Next, I need to put it in/on sidetable 1.", "action": "go to sidetable 1"} Turn 13: Observation: On the sidetable 1, you see a cup 1, a lettuce 1, a peppershaker 3, a potato 1, and a saltshaker 1. Response: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. Now I have the object, I need to place it at the target location to complete the task.", "action": "put apple 3 in/on sidetable 1"} 

USER 

GOAL: <goal_text> CURRENT STEP: <current_step> / <max_steps> — RECENT HISTORY (Previous Steps - For Reference Only) — <recent_history_str> — End of Recent History — >>> CURRENT OBSERVATION (Focus on This - Current State): <observation> <<< End of Current Observation ADMISSIBLE ACTIONS (<N> total): 1. <action_1> 2. <action_2> ... RESPONSE FORMAT: You MUST respond with valid JSON in this exact format: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. [your detailed reasoning]", "action": "exact action from admissible_actions"} Where: - reasoning: MUST start with ‘Let’s think step by step.’ Then explain your thought process, what you observe, and why this action is best - action: Must be EXACTLY one string from the admissible_actions list above (character-for-character match) IMPORTANT: 

19 1. Your reasoning MUST begin with ‘Let’s think step by step.’ 2. Do not include any text before or after the JSON object. 

M.3 ALFWorld Trajectory-Augmented Prompt 

SYSTEM 

Same as ALFWorld Baseline (no-retrieval) System Prompt 

USER 

GOAL: <goal_text> CURRENT STEP: <current_step> / <max_steps> — RECENT HISTORY (Previous Steps - For Reference Only) — <recent_history_str> — End of Recent History — — RETRIEVED TRAJECTORY GUIDANCE (Reference Examples) — RETRIEVED TRAJECTORY: Task: <task_description> Retrieved successful trajectory sequence: Step 1: <action_1> Observation: <observation_1> Step 2: <action_2> Observation: <observation_2> ... Use this trajectory as a reference for your planning. Consider: 1. The sequence of actions that led to success 2. The observations and their progression 3. How to adapt this strategy to the current situation and your goal 4. What steps might be different or similar in your current context — End of Trajectory Guidance — >>> CURRENT OBSERVATION (Focus on This - Current State): <observation> <<< End of Current Observation ADMISSIBLE ACTIONS (<N> total): 1. <action_1> 2. <action_2> ... RESPONSE FORMAT: You MUST respond with valid JSON in this exact format: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. [your detailed reasoning]", "action": "exact action from admissible_actions"} Where: - reasoning: MUST start with ‘Let’s think step by step.’ Then explain your thought process, what you observe, and why this action is best - action: Must be EXACTLY one string from the admissible_actions list above (character-for-character match) IMPORTANT: 

20 1. Your reasoning MUST begin with ‘Let’s think step by step.’ 2. Do not include any text before or after the JSON object. 

M.4 WebArena Baseline (no-retrieval) Prompt 

SYSTEM 

You are an autonomous intelligent agent tasked with navigating a web browser. You will be given web-based tasks. These tasks will be accomplished through the use of specific actions you can issue. Here’s the information you’ll have: The user’s objective: This is the task you’re trying to complete. The current web page’s accessibility tree: This is a simplified representation of the webpage, providing key information. The current web page’s URL: This is the page you’re currently navigating. The open tabs: These are the tabs you have open. The previous action: This is the action you just performed. It may be helpful to track your progress. The actions you can perform fall into several categories: Page Operation Actions: ‘click [id]‘: This action clicks on an element with a specific id on the webpage. ‘type [id] [content] [press_enter_after=0|1]‘: Use this to type the content into the field with id. By default, the "Enter" key is pressed after typing unless press_enter_after is set to 0. ‘hover [id]‘: Hover over an element with id. ‘press [key_comb]‘: Simulates the pressing of a key combination on the keyboard (e.g., Ctrl+v). ‘scroll [direction=down|up]‘: Scroll the page up or down. Tab Management Actions: ‘new_tab‘: Open a new, empty browser tab. ‘tab_focus [tab_index]‘: Switch the browser’s focus to a specific tab using its index. ‘close_tab‘: Close the currently active tab. URL Navigation Actions: ‘goto [url]‘: Navigate to a specific URL. ‘go_back‘: Navigate to the previously viewed page. ‘go_forward‘: Navigate to the next page (if a previous ’go_back’ action was performed). Completion Action: ‘stop [answer]‘: Issue this action when you believe the task is complete. If the objective is to find a text-based answer, provide the answer in the bracket. Available Websites: You have access to the following websites: - OneStopShop (E-commerce): <SHOPPING_URL> - Shopping Admin (CMS): <SHOPPING_ADMIN_URL> - Reddit (Forum): <REDDIT_URL> - GitLab: <GITLAB_URL> - Wikipedia: <WIKIPEDIA_URL> - OpenStreetMap: <MAP_URL> RESPONSE FORMAT: For each turn, you must provide your response in JSON format with two fields: - reasoning: Start with ’Let’s think step by step’ and then provide detailed step-by-step reasoning about the current situation, what you observe, and why the chosen action is the best next step 

21 - action: your chosen action (must be exactly from the available actions) IMPORTANT: 1. You should only issue an action that is valid given the current observation 2. You should only issue one action at a time 3. For each observation, think step by step about what you see and what action to take next 4. Your action MUST be one of the valid action formats listed above 

Few-shot examples and closing sentence. 

Example 1: OBSERVATION: [1744] link ’HP CB782A#ABA 640 Inkjet Fax Machine (Renewed)’ [1749] StaticText ’$279.49’ [1757] button ’Add to Cart’ [1760] button ’Add to Wish List’ [1761] button ’Add to Compare’ URL: http://onestopmarket.com/office-products/office-electronics.html OBJECTIVE: What is the price of HP CB782A#ABA 640 Inkjet Fax Machine (Renewed)? PREVIOUS ACTION: None Response: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. I can see the product HP CB782A#ABA 640 Inkjet Fax Machine (Renewed) is displayed on the page. The price is clearly shown as $279.49 in element [1749]. Since the objective is to find the price, and I have found it, I should stop and provide the answer.", "action": "stop [$279.49]"} Example 2: OBSERVATION: [164] textbox ’Search’ focused: True required: False [171] button ’Search’ URL: http://onestopmarket.com OBJECTIVE: Search for USB-C to USB-B cable on the site. PREVIOUS ACTION: None Response: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. I need to search for USB-C to USB-B cable on this site. I can see a search textbox with id [164] that is already focused. I should type my search query into this textbox and press enter to execute the search. I’ll use press_enter_after=1 to submit the search after typing.", "action": "type [164] [USB-C to USB-B cable] [1]"} Example 3: OBSERVATION: [1124] heading ’Certified Refurbished Kindle Paperwhite’ [1136] StaticText ’by Amazon’ [1163] StaticText ’Price: $79.99’ [1189] button ’Add to Cart’ URL: http://onestopmarket.com/dp/B00ZV 9RDKK OBJECTIVE: Show me the details of the Kindle Paperwhite. PREVIOUS ACTION: click [582] Response: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. I can see the Kindle Paperwhite product page with the heading, price ($79.99), and an Add to Cart button. The objective is to show details of the product. Currently, I can only see basic information. To view more detailed information like specifications, features, or description, I should scroll down the page to see if there are additional details below.", "action": "scroll [down]"} Now, given the current observation, think step-by-step and provide your response. 

22 USER 

GOAL: <goal_text> CURRENT STEP: <current_step> / <max_steps> — RECENT HISTORY (Previous Steps - For Reference Only) — <recent_history_str> — End of Recent History — >>> CURRENT OBSERVATION (Focus on This - Current State): <observation> <<< End of Current Observation CURRENT URL: <url> RESPONSE FORMAT: You MUST respond with valid JSON in this exact format: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. [your detailed reasoning]", "action": "action to be taken"} Where: - reasoning: MUST start with ‘Let’s think step by step.’ Then explain your thought process, what you observe, and why this action is best - action: action to be taken IMPORTANT: 1. Your reasoning MUST begin with ‘Let’s think step by step.’ 2. Do not include any text before or after the JSON object. 

M.5 WebArena Trajectory-Augmented Prompt 

SYSTEM 

Same as WebArena Baseline (no-retrieval) System Prompt 

USER 

GOAL: <goal_text> CURRENT STEP: <current_step> / <max_steps> — RECENT HISTORY (Previous Steps - For Reference Only) — <recent_history_str> — End of Recent History — — RETRIEVED TRAJECTORY GUIDANCE (Reference Examples) — RETRIEVED TRAJECTORY: Task: <task_description> Retrieved successful trajectory: Step 1: Action: <action_1> Observation: <observation_1> Step 2: Action: <action_2> Observation: <observation_2> ... Use this trajectory as a reference for your planning. Consider: 1. The sequence of actions taken 

23 2. How the agent navigated through the website 3. What elements were clicked and in what order 4. When the task was completed — End of Trajectory Guidance — >>> CURRENT OBSERVATION (Focus on This - Current State): <observation> <<< End of Current Observation CURRENT URL: <url> RESPONSE FORMAT: You MUST respond with valid JSON in this exact format: {"reasoning": "Let’s think step by step. [your detailed reasoning]", "action": "action to be taken"} Where: - reasoning: MUST start with ‘Let’s think step by step.’ Then explain your thought process, what you observe, and why this action is best - action: action to be taken IMPORTANT: 1. Your reasoning MUST begin with ‘Let’s think step by step.’ 2. Do not include any text before or after the JSON object. 

N Dataset License 

• ALFWorld: MIT License • WebArena: Apache License 2.0 

O Computational Budget 

For retrieval from the MATM index, we use one NVIDIA L40S GPU. For LLM inference in experiments, the OpenRouter API was used. The total cost was approximately 2,000 USD. 

P Use of AI Assistants 

AI assistants were used for paraphrasing during paper writing and for simple implementation tasks during coding. All outputs were thoroughly reviewed by the authors. 24