Title: Autonomous Event-Driven Multi-Agent Orchestration for Enterprise AI at Scale

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.20058v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 00:52:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 47

Markdown Content:
# Autonomous Event-Driven Multi-Agent Orchestration for Enterprise AI at Scale 

Harsh Rao Dhanyamraju Leonidas Raghav Aaron Lee Data Scientist, SAP SE ML Engineer, SAP SE ML Engineer, SAP SE 

{harsh.rao.dhanyamraju,leonidas.raghav,aaron.lee01}@sap.com 

Abstract 

Enterprise AI aims to move toward continuous event monitoring, detection, and action across specialist agents, yet existing multi-agent systems largely assume discrete request-response workflows and remain underexplored at enterprise scale. We evaluate DAG Plan & Execute and ReAct across 208 production-derived enterprise scenarios spanning Persona (<10 agents), Department (20–80), and Enterprise (200) scales, and introduce a Task Manager for continuous operation via priority inference, related-event merg-ing, and preemption. Results show that scale, not task complexity, dominates orchestration performance: both architectures perform well at small scale but degrade at enterprise scale as agent discovery noise becomes the primary bottleneck, with simple tasks degrading more sharply than complex ones. DAG Plan & Execute offers higher precision and structured parallelization at smaller scales, but its higher overhead worsens at enterprise scale; ReAct is more robust by handling failures incrementally. The Task Manager reduces high-priority queue latency by 14–75% and improves related-event correctness by over 20 percentage points at enterprise scale. 

# 1 Introduction 

1.1 OpenClaw & Multi-Agent Systems 

AI agents extend LLMs beyond text generation by observing an environment, reasoning over goals, and invoking tools or APIs to complete tasks. OpenClaw’s rapid adoption in 2026 showed strong demand for this model: its continuous reasoning loop and standardized tool integration let agents browse, edit files, query databases, and coordinate services across real operating environments [Steinberger, 2026]. That same integration creates the central risk. By combining untrusted inputs, autonomous action, extensibility, and privileged system access in one loop, OpenClaw-style systems can be insecure by design [Li et al., 2026b]; unconstrained deployments such as Moltbook demonstrate how weak guardrails can produce safety incidents and unregulated behavior at scale [Manik and Wang, 2026]. For enterprise settings, autonomy therefore cannot be treated as model capability alone: it requires structural guardrails, permission boundaries, validation logic, and deterministic fallback paths that keep agent actions within operational and business constraints. Subsequent frameworks such as NanoClaw [Qwibit AI, 2026] and IronClaw [NearAI, 2026] respond with container sandboxing, encrypted local state, and layered controls, underscoring that agent usefulness depends on constraining the same system access that makes agents powerful. Beyond security, the limits of single agents have pushed the field toward multi-agent architectures [Adim-ulam et al., 2026]: context and reasoning constraints favor specialized modular agents, while MCP [Model Context Protocol, 2026] and A2A [Surapaneni et al., 2025, A2A Protocol, 2026] provide interoperability and distributed collectives can be more economical than monolithic agents [Dang et al., 2025]. 

> Preprint. Under review.

1

> arXiv:2606.20058v1 [cs.AI] 18 Jun 2026

Prior work already provides orchestration mechanisms, but mostly for discrete tasks: Deep Agent uses hierarchical task DAGs and planner-executor decomposition [Zhang et al., 2025], DynTaskMAS adds dynamic task graphs and asynchronous parallelism [Chen et al., 2025], Anthropic’s research system demonstrates orchestrator-worker parallel subagents [Anthropic, 2025a], and Microsoft codifies coordination topologies such as sequential, concurrent, group chat, handoff, and Magentic patterns [Microsoft, 2026]. Production frameworks including LangGraph [LangChain, Inc., 2024], AutoGen [Wu et al., 2024], IBM Watsonx Orchestrate [IBM Corporation, 2024], Crew.ai [Moura, 2024], PydanticAI [Pydantic Services, Inc., 2024], and Google’s Agent Development Kit [Google LLC, 2025] further supply graph, conversation, automation, role-based, and agent-development infrastructure. Together, these systems establish that multi-agent coordination is practical, but they do not evaluate continuous enterprise event streams, scale-dependent agent discovery, or task prioritization and merging. For enterprise deployment, these orchestration mechanisms must be coupled with deterministic guardrails that validate outputs, enforce business rules, and bound agent autonomy. Yet despite these advances, a critical gap remains: existing systems are designed for request-response interactions, not continuous event-driven operation. 

1.2 The Enterprise Orchestration Challenge 

The ultimate goal of enterprise AI is not merely to answer questions when asked, but to autonomously monitor, detect, and respond to events as they occur. Consider an AI system that observes a production error in a factory, recognizes its severity, investigates the root cause by coordinating multiple specialist agents, and presents a resolution before a human operator even notices the alert. Figure 1 illustrates this shift from reactive chatbots to autonomous digital workers operating continuously alongside human teams. 2Figure 1: Enterprise event-driven orchestration vision. Recent benchmarks such as MCP-Bench [Wang et al., 2026], Tool Decathlon [Li et al., 2026a], and MCPMark [Wu et al., 2026] show that planning and coordination, not language understanding alone, differentiate agent performance, and that agents struggle to maintain coherent state across long-horizon tasks. However, these benchmarks focus on single-agent tool use. They do not evaluate multi-agent orchestration at scale, continuous event-driven operation, or task prioritization and merging. Multi-agent orchestration at enterprise scale remains underexplored. We compare structured DAG Plan & Execute against ReAct across three organizational scales: Persona (<10 agents), Department (20–80 agents), and Enterprise (200 agents), and four task types: Simple, Parallel, Complex, and Failure. Existing multi-agent systems assume discrete request-response workflows, while enterprise environments produce asynchronous event streams: alerts, user requests, scheduled jobs, and follow-up signals with different urgency. Related events should merge into a unified task rather than fragment into duplicate work, while critical events should preempt routine processing. We introduce a Task Manager that infers priority, merges related events, enables preemption, and supports steering by absorbing new events into an active plan. This continuous-event setting also motivates SAP’s framing of the Autonomous Enterprise. SAP describes the Autonomous Enterprise as a model in which humans, AI assistants, and agents work together across critical business workflows, supported by Joule Work, SAP Autonomous Suite, and SAP Business AI Platform [SAP News, 2026, SAP, 2026b]. SAP further characterizes SAP Business AI Platform as an enterprise AI foundation that combines AI, data, process context, and governance, with components such as SAP Knowledge Graph and Joule Studio intended to ground agents in business semantics and govern their deployment [SAP, 2026a]. For this paper, that framing becomes a concrete research question: how should 3enterprise AI systems coordinate many specialist agents over continuous business events while preserving process context, user permissions, and operational guardrails? Realizing this goal requires more than capable individual agents. An enterprise orchestrator must select relevant agents from large registries, schedule work across concurrent event streams, preserve user-specific privilege boundaries, merge related events without duplicating work, and route actions through domain- and workflow-specific guardrails. This paper studies that orchestration layer directly: we evaluate how competing agent-control architectures behave as registry scale grows, and whether a Task Manager can support continuous event-driven operation through backlog management, event merging, and preemption. 

# 2 System Architectures 

2.1 ReAct 

ReAct (Reasoning and Acting) [Yao et al., 2023] is the default orchestration architecture for LLM-based agents, where a single model interleaves reasoning and action in a continuous loop without upfront planning. Our implementation uses the PydanticAI framework [Pydantic Services, Inc., 2024], which supports parallel tool calling. The agent receives the task and conversation history, emits tool calls–including A2A invocations to specialist agents–observes results, and continues until the task is complete. Native parallel tool execution allows independent agent calls (via A2A) to proceed concurrently, partially mitigating the latency disadvantage of reactive approaches. In the event-driven setting, ReAct remains a single reasoning loop but exposes deterministic stoppage points to the Task Manager. As shown in Figure 2, the Task Manager can inspect the backlog after an agent call returns and before the next reasoning step begins, allowing a higher-priority task to preempt the current one or merged event context to be injected into the next step. The full ReAct system prompt is provided in Appendix F. 

2.2 DAG Plan & Execute 

DAG Plan & Execute is a structured orchestration approach where a Planner generates an execution graph upfront, an Executor dispatches work to agents, and a Replanner adapts the plan when conditions change. This architecture separates planning from execution, enabling parallel agent invocation and systematic failure recovery. The Planner transforms task descriptions into directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Agent discovery operates in two phases, inspired by Anthropic’s Skills system [Anthropic, 2025b]: first, lightweight summaries of all registered agents are retrieved, allowing the model to select relevant agents without loading full context; second, complete agent cards are loaded only for selected agents. This prevents the Planner from reasoning over hundreds of complete agent descriptions at once while still giving it enough skill-level detail for the agents it actually selects. The Planner then generates a typed execution graph. Agent nodes represent calls to specialist A2A agents, while combine nodes synthesize intermediate results without making a new external agent call. Edges encode both ordering constraints and context-passing instructions: a downstream node can depend on identifiers, summaries, or partial findings produced upstream. Before execution begins, the DAG is validated for acyclic structure, valid node references, reachable roots, and dependency consistency. This validation step is important because a malformed plan would otherwise fail only after partial execution. The Executor dispatches nodes to agents via the A2A protocol, an asynchronous pattern where the orchestrator submits tasks and polls for completion. Before each invocation, a lightweight LLM synthesizes the agent prompt from the task context and prior results–since planning is complete, these calls require minimal reasoning. Nodes execute in parallel batches: any node whose prerequisites have completed can 4run concurrently with other ready nodes. After each response, the LLM evaluates the output: CONTINUE if satisfactory, RETRY with an amended message if incomplete, or INTERRUPT if failure requires plan modification. Execution is therefore not a single monolithic plan run. The Executor advances through the DAG in batches, records completed nodes and accumulated results in OrchestrationState, and maintains a quantum counter for completed agent calls. A deterministic check monitors this quantum budget; when exhausted, execution pauses at a CHECKPOINT. Figure 2 shows where this checkpoint boundary connects DAG Plan & Execute to the Task Manager: before replanning begins, the Task Manager can inspect the backlog, inject merged event context, or preempt the active task for higher-priority work. The Replanner handles dynamic adaptation, triggered by CHECKPOINT, INTERRUPT, or RESUME (task returning from suspension). A two-level decision process determines: (1) whether replanning is needed, and (2) whether different agents are required. When current agents suffice, the system performs a DAG edit preserving completed work; when new agents are needed, a full replan runs agent discovery again with previous context included. The Agent Registry implements two-tier discovery (summaries for selection, full cards on-demand). OrchestrationState maintains shared context: current DAG, completed nodes, accumulated results, and quantum counter. 

2.2.1 DAG Runtime Architecture and Control 

A central DAG Plan & Execute design decision is to orchestrate pre-existing specialist agents over A2A rather than dynamically spawning subagents. This trades general-purpose flexibility for domain-specific accuracy, stable agent interfaces, and clearer operational boundaries. In this architecture, the Planner acts like a process loader, the Executor acts like a dispatcher, and the DAG provides the explicit runtime state that separates planning decisions from agent execution. • Two-tier agent discovery. Discovery operates in two phases. First, the Planner retrieves lightweight summaries for all registered agents so the model can select a candidate set without loading every full agent card. Second, complete cards with skill definitions and examples are loaded only for selected agents. This keeps prompt context bounded as the registry grows while still giving the Planner enough detail to construct a DAG. • Executor statelessness. The Executor does not hold conversation history. It sees only the current orchestration state: DAG, completed nodes, accumulated context, and quantum counter. The Planner therefore attaches processing instructions to DAG edges, carrying the necessary cross-step context directly in the graph. • Checkpoints and replanning. DAG Plan & Execute limits the number of agent calls before forcing a checkpoint. Replanning can be triggered by a checkpoint, by an interrupt after a failed or incomplete node, or by resuming a preempted task. When the current agents remain sufficient, replanning edits the DAG while preserving completed work; when additional agents are needed, discovery runs again with prior context included. Events merged into an active task are queued and presented at the next checkpoint, enabling dynamic steering without discarding completed work. • Runtime configuration. DAG-specific controls such as quantum budget, retry policy, and checkpoint frequency are runtime-configurable. This matters in enterprise settings because the right balance between execution progress, recovery cost, and replanning overhead is workload-dependent. The full DAG planner prompts appear in Appendix E. 52.3 Task Manager 

The Task Manager serves as the entry point for all work entering the orchestration system, functioning analogously to a process scheduler in an operating system kernel. Events from monitoring systems, user interactions, scheduled triggers, or peer assistants arrive via a message broker which is an asynchronous publish-subscribe layer that decouples event sources from the orchestration logic. The event to task conversion leverages LLM-powered decision making. Events arrive without priority information; when an event arrives, the model decides whether to create a new task or merge it into an existing one, and assigns the appropriate priority level based on event content and context. LLM decisions are validated against configuration constraints; if validation fails, the system re-prompts with error feedback or falls back to safe defaults, ensuring no event is dropped. Tasks are placed in a priority-ordered backlog. The priority system defines three levels (LOW, MEDIUM, HIGH) with a scoring function incorporating base priority, task age, and progress toward completion– preventing starvation while incentivizing completion of in-progress work. The orchestrator pulls the highest-scoring task from the backlog for execution. Tasks transition through QUEUED (in backlog), ACTIVE (being orchestrated), and COMPLETED states. The Task Manager integrates with both orchestration architectures at defined stoppage points where preemption or task updates (from merged events) can occur. Figure 2 shows this integration for both ReAct and DAG Plan & Execute. For DAG Plan & Execute, this happens at checkpoints–just before replanning begins–where the system deterministically checks for higher-priority tasks or pending event merges. For ReAct, stoppage points occur after an agent call returns but before the next LLM reasoning step, leveraging PydanticAI’s agent.iter() [Pydantic Team, 2026] to pause between iterations. At either stoppage point, the system can preempt the current task for higher-priority work or inject merged event context into the active task. 

Figure 2: Task Manager integration with orchestration architectures. The Task Backlog below details the deterministic queue state, event-processing logic, and configurable priority scoring model managed by the Task Manager. 

2.4 Task Backlog 

The Task Backlog is the deterministic queue state managed by the Task Manager. It stores tasks, task status, merged pending events, priority metadata, and any saved orchestration state needed to resume preempted work. The Task Manager may use an LLM to interpret incoming events, but no LLM output directly mutates the backlog until it passes schema validation and configuration checks. 6The Task Manager processes each incoming event with a decision function that chooses whether to create a new task, merge into an existing task, or ignore the event. The decision is validated against configuration constraints before it affects the backlog. If validation fails, the system retries with error feedback or falls back to safe defaults, ensuring that events are not silently dropped. The merge rule is intentionally conservative: tasks in the backlog must remain independent, and events are merged only when they clearly concern the same underlying situation. This prevents unrelated incidents from being conflated while still allowing follow-up events, user steering, and correlated system alerts to enrich an active task. Tasks are ranked by a deterministic composite score: score = base_priority × (1 .0 + time_bonus ) + progress_factor where base_priority ∈ { 1.0, 2.0, 3.0} corresponds to LOW, MEDIUM, and HIGH respectively. The time bonus is max(0 , (task_age /mean_age ) − 1.0) × wt, with default wt = 0 .1, so aging only helps tasks that have waited longer than average. The progress factor is (completed_nodes /total_nodes ) × wp, with default wp = 0 .5, which slightly favors finishing in-progress work over switching to an equally ranked fresh task. The formula is deliberately configurable: deployments can change the weights, thresholds, or priority mapping to match workload-specific responsiveness, fairness, and context-switching costs while keeping backlog ordering deterministic once those parameters are set. Preemption occurs only at defined stoppage points. In DAG Plan & Execute, these are checkpoints before replanning. In ReAct, they occur after an agent call returns but before the next reasoning step. At either point, a sufficiently higher-priority task can suspend the current task, save its orchestration state, and resume it later. 

# 3 Benchmark Design 

The evaluation dataset comprises 208 scenarios derived from actual user stories, enterprise workflows, and business processes, generating 393 events and 1,051 total agent calls. Scenarios span three organizational scales–Persona (<10 agents), Department (20–80 agents), and Enterprise (200 agents)–to evaluate how orchestration performance degrades as the discovery space grows. The mock agent population covers 200 enterprise functions organized into 7 departments (Finance, HR, Procurement, Revenue, Supply Chain, IT, and Customer Support) with 19 specialized personas, mirroring an anonymized fleet of enterprise agents under active development within the company. 

Orchestration scenarios test structural complexity: • Simple scenarios (1–3 agents) establish baseline competency. • Parallel scenarios (4–8 agents) test concurrent execution of independent subproblems. • Complex scenarios (5–10 agents) combine dependency handling with parallel work, creating multi-stage execution paths where upstream agents provide entity identifiers required by downstream agents while independent branches can proceed concurrently. • Failure scenarios introduce incomplete or ambiguous responses, requiring the orchestrator to detect missing information, retry with refined requests, or proceed with partial data. 

Event management scenarios test the Task Manager’s continuous operation capabilities: • Priority scenarios verify correct triage when critical events (equipment failures, safety incidents) arrive during lower-priority work. • Related Events scenarios require identifying semantic relationships between events pertaining to the same underlying situation, merging them into unified tasks, and leveraging cross-event context–while filtering unrelated distractors. 7The dataset includes 95 Persona-level, 63 Department-level, and 50 Enterprise-level scenarios. Each scenario specifies: a natural language user prompt, the expected agents and execution pattern (sequential, parallel, or mixed), per-agent guidelines including expected identifiers, keywords, and ground-truth response data, and expected answer fragments used for evaluation. This structure enables automated scoring of agent discovery precision/recall, execution pattern correctness, entity extraction accuracy, and response completeness. Dataset construction and release constraints are described below. The scenario schema and examples appear in Appendix B, and the complete anonymized agent catalog appears in Appendix G. 

3.1 Benchmark Design Rationale 

The benchmark is designed to isolate scale as an orchestration variable. Persona-level scenarios test whether an architecture works when the relevant specialist set is small and discovery is easy. Department-level scenarios introduce a larger but still thematically related agent pool. Enterprise-level scenarios create the needle-in-a-haystack setting that occurs when an assistant must find a few relevant capabilities among hundreds of registered agents. The scenario taxonomy separates different failure modes: • Simple scenarios primarily test discovery precision: the orchestrator must locate one to three relevant agents without being distracted by semantically adjacent tools. • Parallel scenarios test whether independent branches are dispatched concurrently. • Complex scenarios test mixed execution structure: they combine dependent steps, where downstream agents often need identifiers produced upstream, with parallel branches that can proceed once the required context is available. • Failure scenarios test whether the system detects incomplete or ambiguous responses and recovers without cascading errors. • Priority and related-event scenarios test whether the Task Manager can support continuous operation rather than one-shot request handling. This design intentionally uses deterministic expected agents, expected call patterns, and expected answer fragments. The goal is not to benchmark open-ended language quality, but to measure whether an orchestration architecture routes, sequences, retries, merges, and preempts work correctly as the agent registry grows. 

3.2 Dataset Construction Methodology 

The 208 evaluation scenarios were constructed through the human-in-the-loop generation pipeline shown in Figure 3. Source material–comprising anonymized user stories from an enterprise agent fleet under active company development, documented workflows, and business process specifications–was provided to an LLM which generated high-level story plans identifying the scenario type, expected agent sequence, and call pattern. Each plan was reviewed by a human with domain knowledge; rejected plans were revised and resubmitted until approved. Approved plans then entered a second generation stage where the LLM produced exact specifications: natural language user prompts, per-agent guidelines ( expected_prompts , keywords ,

expected_response_info ), event timing, and dependencies. These details underwent a second human review loop to verify entity boundaries, response fidelity, and scenario completeness before finalization. 8Figure 3: Dataset construction pipeline. Blue nodes indicate source material, purple nodes indicate LLM generation stages, gold diamonds indicate human review gates, and the green node indicates a finalized scenario. Because the benchmark is derived from enterprise agent use cases under active company development, the raw source material, internal workflow specifications, full per-agent guideline files, and implementation code cannot be released. Instead, the paper reports the benchmark structure and evaluation protocol: scale definitions, scenario taxonomy, construction pipeline, anonymized agent catalog, scenario schema, representative examples, prompts, metrics, and aggregate results. An external replication can instantiate the same evaluation design by constructing an anonymized agent catalog at the three scales, authoring scenarios under the same scenario types, implementing deterministic mock agents, and scoring outputs with the reported metrics and judge prompt. 

# 4 Evaluation Methodology 

4.1 Mock Agents 

Testing orchestration at enterprise scale with hundreds of production agents would be prohibitively expensive and difficult to control. Hence, the evaluation harness uses mock agents that simulate realistic enterprise behavior while providing controlled ground truth responses. Each mock agent is an LLM-powered service conforming to the A2A protocol, exposing a realistic agent card with description, skill declarations, and capability metadata. When the System Under Test (SUT) routes a request to a mock agent, it makes a single LLM call that receives the agent’s identity, the active story’s context, and per-agent guidelines specifying expected entities, keywords, and ground-truth response data. Entity identification serves as a hard filter enforced by the LLM–the agent only releases information if the request properly identifies the relevant entity (equipment ID, order number, customer name). This mirrors real enterprise behavior and enforces prerequisite dependencies, since entity identifiers are often obtained from previous agent calls. Once identification passes, the agent returns only the specific information requested, even if its guidelines contain additional data; if the entity is not recognized or the request falls outside scope, the agent returns a polite refusal. This design produces credible mocks because agents must reason about entity boundaries and request scope–the quality of the response depends entirely on how well the orchestrator identifies entities and frames requests, exactly the property under evaluation. Correctness is measured using LLM-as-judge evaluation, comparing the orchestrator’s final synthesized response against the scenario’s expected answer fragments. The full mock-agent prompt is provided in Appendix A, and the judge prompt is provided in Appendix D. 

4.2 Mock Agent Behavior 

The mock agent server simulates 200 enterprise agents using a shared LLM prompt that combines agent identity, story context, and per-agent guidelines. Each agent receives its name, description, skills, expected prompts, keywords, and expected response information at call time. This allows a unified executor to serve all agents while still producing domain-specific behavior. 9The classification logic uses two axes. The first axis identifies whether the prompt contains enough information to determine the target entity, such as an equipment ID, order number, employee profile, or customer account. The second axis determines whether the prompt asks for information covered by that agent’s guidelines. A request is classified as MATCH when both axes are satisfied, CLOSE_MATCH when the entity is identified but some requested information is unavailable, and MISMATCH when the entity cannot be identified or the request falls outside the agent’s scope. Agents never invent data; they return only information present in expected_response_info or decline/refine the request. This setup preserves the evaluation target: the orchestrator must select the right agents, pass the right identifiers, and ask sufficiently scoped questions. Downstream generation quality is deliberately constrained so that correctness reflects orchestration behavior rather than uncontrolled agent creativity. 

# 5 Results 

Figure 4: Mean correctness scores by scenario type and organizational scale. 

5.1 Orchestration 

Figure 4 shows correctness scores across scenario types and organizational scales. Both architectures perform well at Persona level (74–98%) but degrade significantly as agent count increases–Department scores drop to 65–80%, and Enterprise scores fall to 32–83%. Simple tasks become harder than Complex at scale :Simple scenarios degrade from 90–96% (Persona) to 36–54% (Enterprise), while Complex scenarios maintain 73–83%. This counterintuitive result reflects the discovery bottleneck–finding 1–3 specific agents among 200 is harder than finding 4-7 agents. 

ReAct outperforms DAG at Enterprise scale , winning on every scenario type at 200 agents. The core issue is that DAG doesn’t fail fast. When discovery errors occur or agents return unexpected results, DAG’s plan-interrupt-replan cycle adds overhead: re-running discovery, rebuilding the execution graph, and re-validating dependencies. At enterprise scale where discovery is already noisy, this adds overhead. ReAct handles problems relatively quickly without triggering full replanning. DAG’s failure handling collapses at scale (93.7% → 68.3% → 32.4%) for the same reason: failure scenarios trigger replanning by design, but replanning at 200 agents means repeatedly querying a noisy discovery layer. However, DAG shows modest advantages on Complex and Parallel tasks at Persona and Department scales, where upfront planning identifies parallelization opportunities before execution. 

Precision and recall analysis (Figure 5) reveals the underlying mechanism. Precision and recall are calculated by comparing expected agent calls against actual calls. Duplicate calls to the same agent are ignored since orchestrators sometimes split complex requests across multiple invocations. DAG achieves 10 higher precision at every scale as upfront planning selects agents more carefully, but its recall degrades worse at enterprise scale. When DAG misses an agent during discovery, replanning doesn’t recover it as the same noisy discovery layer produces the same gaps. ReAct’s recall holds up better precisely because it lacks the machinery that compounds errors. Additional analysis including confidence intervals, repeated agent calls, response quality, token usage, and breakdowns by department and persona appears in Appendix C. 

Figure 5: Agent call precision and recall by scenario type and organizational scale. 

5.2 Event Management 

The Task Manager adds two capabilities to event-driven operation: merging related events into unified tasks, and priority-based preemption. We evaluate each independently. 11 Figure 6: Correctness scores for related event scenarios by organizational scale. 

Related events (Figure 6) test whether the system can identify semantically connected events–such as a sensor alert followed by a maintenance request for the same equipment–and merge them into a single task that leverages cross-event context. Without merging, each event is processed independently, missing shared entity identifiers and situational awareness. Task Manager improves correctness at Enterprise scale by over 20 percentage points for both architectures: ReAct rises from 34% to 57%, DAG from 35% to 56%. At Persona scale, DAG benefits most from merging (59% →78%), likely because fewer concurrent events produce cleaner merge decisions. 

Priority handling (Table 1) measures queue time for high-priority events arriving while lower-priority work is in progress. Events arrive without priority labels–the Task Manager infers priority from event content and context (ground-truth priority was maintained only for evaluation). Without preemption, FIFO processing forces critical events to wait behind long-running tasks. This is catastrophic for DAG at scale–high-priority events wait over 5 minutes at Department and Enterprise levels. Task Manager’s preemption keeps queue time stable regardless of scale, saving 14–75% of wait time across both architectures. System Persona Department Enterprise FIFO + ReAct 21s 79s 107s Task M + ReAct 15s 68s 56s Saved (ReAct) 29% 14% 48% FIFO + DAG 108s 323s 305s Task M + DAG 42s 81s 79s Saved (DAG) 61% 75% 74% Table 1: Mean queue time for high-priority events and percentage reduction with Task Manager. Additional related-event distributions, token usage, and cost analyses are reported in Appendix C. 

# 6 Enterprise Deployment Implications 

In enterprise deployments, the choice between DAG Plan & Execute and ReAct should be driven less by task complexity than by registry scale and recovery cost. DAG Plan & Execute is attractive when the relevant agent set is small or moderately sized, dependencies are known, and parallelization can be exploited. Its 12 upfront planning improves precision and makes execution structure explicit. However, the experiments show that at enterprise scale, repeated discovery inside plan-interrupt-replan loops can compound errors and increase latency. ReAct is the stronger default when discovery is noisy, failure recovery must be incremental, or the cost of replanning is high. Its stepwise interaction gives it fewer opportunities to overcommit to an incorrect global plan. This makes it more robust at 200-agent scale, especially on failure scenarios where a structured replanning architecture repeatedly queries the same noisy discovery layer. The Task Manager is most valuable when the workload is continuous rather than request-response. Priority inference, related-event merging, and preemption convert an orchestrator from a single-task assistant into a scheduler for event streams. In practice, enterprise systems should monitor backlog age, preemption frequency, merge accuracy, repeated agent calls, and discovery recall. These signals reveal whether the bottleneck is agent selection, task scheduling, agent response quality, or synthesis. This evaluation uses a single orchestration worker, but enterprise deployments will likely need multiple workers. We do not study distributed scheduling here. However, the design choice that each backlog task is independent is important for that setting: independent tasks can be partitioned, leased, or migrated across workers without requiring every worker to share the full conversational state of every other task. The difficult open problem is then coordination around priority ordering, preemption, and fairness across partitions rather than the representation of the task itself. Multi-user deployments add a second scaling problem. Different users subscribe to different event streams based on their responsibilities and privileges, so user-scoped events should be processed from that user’s permission context. Company-wide or department-wide broadcasts are different: naively running every broadcast through every user’s orchestrator can waste tokens and compute while repeating the same work. A practical pattern is to process broad broadcasts only when they merge with a user-scoped event, giving the orchestrator the user’s perspective and objective on the shared signal. Separately, a general organizational orchestrator can process company-level broadcasts once for aggregate awareness. This avoids rerunning identical tasks unless a new user perspective, privilege context, or objective justifies it. The right policy will depend on organizational structure, job roles, event frequency, and the nature of the work, but event scoping is a necessary design consideration before autonomous event streams are allowed to run continuously. Finally, the orchestrator should not be the component that decides whether a consequential action is safe. Its role is to schedule work, route context, preserve state, and surface control signals. Safety decisions should remain with the workflow-specific specialist agents that understand the relevant policy, data boundary, and approval rule. For example, an HR compensation agent should enforce pay-equity and manager-approval constraints, a finance close agent should enforce posting thresholds and segregation-of-duties checks, and an IT operations agent should require operator approval before restarting or disabling critical services. This separation is especially important for human-in-the-loop (HITL) workflows. A HITL request should not be treated as an ordinary model failure or silently resolved by the orchestrator. The orchestrator should pause the affected task, propagate the approval request to the right human or workflow owner, preserve the task state, and resume only after an authorized response is received. In this deployment pattern, guardrails are both domain-specific and workflow-specific: specialist agents encode the business rules for their domain, while the orchestrator enforces scheduling, context flow, auditability, fallback behavior, and cross-agent coordination. 

# 7 Conclusion 

We evaluated DAG Plan & Execute and ReAct architectures across 208 scenarios spanning Persona, Depart-ment, and Enterprise scales. Scale, not task complexity, dominates performance–both architectures perform well with fewer than 10 agents but degrade at enterprise scale, where agent discovery noise becomes the 13 bottleneck. Counterintuitively, simple tasks degrade more than complex tasks as it’s a needle in a haystack problem. ReAct remains the default architecture: it handles errors quickly without heavy replanning cycles, and its recall holds up better at scale. DAG Plan & Execute offers advantages for structured workflows at small-to-medium scale through better parallelization and precision, but its plan-interrupt-replan overhead compounds errors at enterprise scale. The Task Manager demonstrated value through priority-based preemp-tion (reducing queue time by 14–75% for high priority tasks) and merging related events into unified tasks (+20% correctness at enterprise scale). 

# Limitations 

• Mock Agent Latency. Mock agents execute a single LLM call, producing responses significantly faster than production agents that perform multi-step reasoning with tool invocations. This compresses queue dynamics and underrepresents the window during which higher-priority events may arrive and trigger preemption, making queue wait times difficult to benchmark directly. • Fixed Orchestration Parameters. Tunable parameters such as the checkpoint quantum were held constant to isolate the effect of orchestration topology from configuration tuning. Optimal values are likely workload-dependent, and sensitivity analysis across these dimensions remains as future work. • No Agentic Memory. The evaluation excludes persistent memory to establish a controlled baseline independent of learned optimizations. Results therefore represent a lower bound; memory-augmented deployments would likely improve on repeated event patterns. • Single Orchestration Worker. All experiments assume one orchestration worker with parallel agent dispatch within each task. Multi-worker deployments introduce backlog partitioning and distributed priority ordering challenges not addressed here. 

# References 

A2A Protocol. What is a2a protocol?, 2026. URL https://a2a-protocol.org/latest/ .A. Adimulam, R. Gupta, and S. Kumar. The orchestration of multi-agent systems: Architectures, protocols, and enterprise adoption. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.13671 , 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2601.13671. Anthropic. How we built our multi-agent research system, 2025a. URL https://www.anthropic.com/ engineering/multi-agent-research-system .Anthropic. Extend claude with skills, 2025b. URL https://code.claude.com/docs/en/skills .M. Chen et al. Dyntaskmas: Dynamic task graph generation and asynchronous parallel execution for multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07675 , 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2503.07675. Y. Dang et al. Multi-agent collaboration via evolving orchestration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19591 , 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2505.19591. Google LLC. Agent development kit, 2025. URL https://google.github.io/adk-docs/ .IBM Corporation. Ibm watsonx orchestrate: Ai-powered automation for enterprise workflows, 2024. URL 

https://www.ibm.com/products/watsonx-orchestrate .LangChain, Inc. Langgraph: Build resilient language agents as graphs, 2024. URL https://github.com/ langchain-ai/langgraph .14 J. Li et al. The tool decathlon: Benchmarking language agents for diverse, realistic, and long-horizon task execution. In Proceedings of ICLR , 2026a. Z. Li, W. Li, and X. Li. Defensible design for openclaw: Securing autonomous tool-invoking agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.13151 , 2026b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.13151 .T. Manik and S. Wang. From agent-only social networks to autonomous scientific research: Lessons from openclaw and moltbook, and the architecture of clawdlab and beach.science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.19810 , 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.19810 .Microsoft. Ai agent orchestration patterns, 2026. URL https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ architecture/ai-ml/guide/ai-agent-design-patterns .Model Context Protocol. Introduction to mcp, 2026. URL https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/ getting-started/intro .J. Moura. Crewai: Framework for orchestrating role-playing autonomous ai agents, 2024. URL https: //github.com/crewAIInc/crewAI .NearAI. Ironclaw: Privacy-first assistant with encrypted local state and layered security, 2026. Pydantic Services, Inc. Pydanticai: Agent framework for production grade applications with generative ai, 2024. URL https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic-ai .Pydantic Team. Agents: Running agents, 2026. URL https://pydantic.dev/docs/ai/api/ pydantic-ai/agent/ .Qwibit AI. Nanoclaw: Container-sandboxed agent execution. GitHub repository, 2026. URL https: //github.com/qwibitai/nanoclaw .SAP. Sap business ai platform, 2026a. URL https://www.sap.com/products/ai-platform.html .SAP. Sap sapphire 2026 innovation news guide, 2026b. URL https://www.sap.com/topics/events/ sapphire/innovation-news-guide-2026 .SAP News. Sap unveils the autonomous enterprise, May 2026. URL https://news.sap.com/2026/05/ sap-sapphire-sap-unveils-autonomous-enterprise/ .P. Steinberger. Openclaw. GitHub repository, 2026. URL https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw .R. Surapaneni, M. Jha, M. Vakoc, and T. Segal. Announcing the agent2agent protocol (a2a), 2025. URL 

https://developers.googleblog.com/en/a2a-a-new-era-of-agent-interoperability/ .Z. Wang et al. Mcp-bench: Benchmarking tool-using llm agents with complex real-world tasks via mcp servers. In Proceedings of ICLR , 2026. Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, A. H. Awadallah, R. W. White, D. Burger, and C. Wang. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2308.08155 .Z. Wu et al. Mcpmark: A benchmark for stress-testing realistic and comprehensive mcp use. In Proceedings of ICLR , 2026. 15 Shunyu Yao et al. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In Proceedings of ICLR ,2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X .Z. Zhang et al. Autonomous deep agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07056 , 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2502. 07056. 16 Appendix A Mock Agent Design: Prompt and Classification Logic 

The mock agent server simulates 200 enterprise agents using a single shared LLM prompt that combines agent identity, story context, and classification rules. Each mock agent receives its identity and domain-specific guidelines at call time, enabling a unified executor to serve all agents without per-agent logic. The following system prompt governs response generation: 

You are a mock enterprise agent in a test harness. ## Identity - Agent: {agent_name} - Description: {agent_description} - Capabilities: {agent_skills} ## Story Context Active story: "{story_title}" ## Guidelines {guidelines_section} ## Response Schema {response_schema} ## Rules 1. Identify which of YOUR expected_prompts & keywords that the user 's prompt relates to. - Expected Prompts => Identifier to help identify the entity related to the request - Keywords => Information requested about said entity 2. Classify the user 's request into the following: - MATCH: Can identify the entity (sufficient expected prompts) AND have all requested information (sufficient keywords) ,→

- CLOSE_MATCH: Can identify the entity (sufficient expected prompts) BUT lack some requested information (insufficient keywords) ,→

- MISMATCH: Cannot identify the entity (insufficient expected prompts) OR no guidelines apply OR a refusal condition is triggered ,→

3. In case of a MATCH: Return expected_response_info lightly reformatted to match the question where appropriate, but all information must be included. ,→

4. In case of a CLOSE_MATCH: Return the relevant subset of expected_response_info. Do not volunteer extra information that is not asked for. ,→

5. In case of a MISMATCH: Use the appropriate response: - Ambiguous entity: "Many records match the <description>. Could you narrow it down?" - No applicable guidelines: "This request is outside my area of expertise. I handle <your capabilities>." - Refusal triggered: Politely decline 6. NEVER invent data. Only use what 's in expected_response_info. 7. Return expected_response_info as-is or the relevant fraction of it. Never add extra information beyond what is provided. ,→

Respond with valid JSON matching the provided schema. 

The classification logic implements entity identification through a two-axis matching system. The first axis ( expected_prompts ) identifies which entity the request concerns, while the second axis ( keywords )determines whether the agent possesses the requested information about that entity. This produces three outcomes – MATCH when both axes are satisfied, CLOSE_MATCH when only entity identification succeeds, and MISMATCH when entity identification fails or a refusal condition triggers. The structured response conforms to the following schema: 

{"type": "object", "required": ["expected_prompts_matched", "keywords_matched", "classification", "reasoning", "response"], "properties": { "expected_prompts_matched": { 

17 "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}, "description": "Which items from the expected prompts list the user 's prompt mentions" }, "keywords_matched": { "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}, "description": "Which keywords from the keyword list the user 's prompt asks about or relates to" }, "classification": { "type": "string", "enum": ["MATCH", "CLOSE_MATCH", "MISMATCH"], "description": "MATCH: request can be addressed using available data. CLOSE_MATCH: partially relevant but cannot fully help. MISMATCH: no keywords match OR no guidelines exist OR refusal trigger hit." ,→

> }, "reasoning": { "type": "string", "description": "Brief (1-2 sentences): which expected_prompts and keywords matched and why" }, "response": { "type": "string", "description": "Agent response using data from expected_response_info. Include all relevant context. Do not invent data. If MISMATCH, politely decline stating capabilities." ,→
> }}}

This design ensures deterministic, reproducible agent behavior: given identical guidelines and user prompts, the classification outcome is consistent across runs, enabling reliable evaluation of orchestrator routing decisions. 

# B Scenario Structure and Type Taxonomy 

The evaluation dataset comprises 208 scenarios organized into five types: complex, parallel, failure, steering, and priority. Each scenario is defined as a structured document containing metadata, one or more events (user prompts that trigger orchestration), and agent guidelines (expected behavior contracts for mock agents). During evaluation, only the event’s user_prompt is passed to the system under test – the orchestrator must independently discover agents, plan execution order, and synthesize prompts without access to the ground-truth fields. This section first presents the full schema through a representative example, then illustrates each type’s distinguishing characteristics. 

B.0.1 Part 1: Full Scenario Anatomy 

The following is a representative complex scenario exercising a six-agent sequential pipeline for a new product introduction workflow. 

Scenario Metadata: 

• ID: department-supply-chain-complex-001 .• Title: New Product Introduction End-to-End. • Type: complex .• Department: Supply Chain. • Level: Department (cross-functional). • Description: full lifecycle from recipe development through supplier sourcing, qualification, production scheduling, shop floor preparation, and asset readiness verification. Tests orchestrator routing across formulation, procurement, and manufacturing agents in sequence. 

Event: 

18 • ID: evt-001 .• Call pattern: sequential. • Timeout: 60 seconds. • User prompt: "We are introducing a new high-performance thermal paste product targeting the semicon-ductor packaging market. Execute the full NPI process: develop the recipe formulation for a silicone-free thermal interface material, identify and qualify suppliers for boron nitride platelets and aluminium oxide nanoparticles, onboard the selected supplier from South Korea, create the production plan for an initial batch at our facility, prepare the shop floor including workstation setup and operator training, and verify that our mixing equipment can handle the new formulation parameters." 

Expected Agent Sequence: 

• recipe-formulation-agent : develops material formulation meeting thermal and viscosity specifications. • supplier-discovery-agent : identifies qualified suppliers for raw materials. • supplier-onboarding-agent : qualifies and registers the selected new vendor. • production-planning-operations-agent : creates batch production schedule and BOM. • shop-floor-supervisor-agent : prepares workstations, training, and quality checkpoints. • asset-health-agent : verifies equipment readiness for new formulation parameters. 

Agent Guidelines (example – recipe-formulation-agent ): 

• Expected prompts: thermal paste , silicone-free , 8 W/mK , viscosity , boron nitride .• Keywords: formulation , thermal conductivity , silicone-free .• Expected response: Recipe Formulation – TP-ULTRA-500; Component 1: Hexagonal Boron Nitride platelets (62% by weight); Component 2: Aluminium Oxide nanoparticles (8%); Component 3: Polyol ester base fluid (26%); predicted thermal conductivity: 8.4 W/mK; processing: 4-stage mixing with 48-hour cure. 

(Guidelines for remaining 5 agents follow the same structure, each specifying domain-specific expected prompts, keywords, and ground-truth response content.) 

Schema Field Definitions: 

• story_id : unique identifier encoding level, department, type, and sequence number. • title : human-readable scenario name. • description : summary of what the scenario tests in the orchestrator. • type : one of complex , parallel , failure , steering , or priority .• department : organizational domain, such as supply_chain or finance .• level : scenario scope, either persona , department , or enterprise .• events[].id : event identifier within the scenario. • events[].user_prompt : natural-language request submitted to the orchestrator. • events[].expected_agents_called : ground-truth agent list the orchestrator should invoke. • events[].expected_call_pattern : expected topology: sequential , parallel , or any_order .• events[].timeout_seconds : maximum allowed orchestration time for this event. • events[].delay_seconds : delay before injecting this event, used in multi-event scenarios. • events[].depends_on : causal dependency on a prior event. • events[].priority : explicit priority level: low , medium , or high .• agent_guidelines{} : per-agent behavior contracts specifying expected prompts, response content, and keywords. • agent_guidelines.expected_prompts : keywords the mock agent uses to classify incoming requests as MATCH or MISMATCH. 19 • agent_guidelines.expected_response_info : substantive content the mock agent returns when classi-fication is MATCH. • agent_guidelines.keywords : additional terms for fuzzy matching. The agent_guidelines mechanism enables deterministic evaluation: mock agents do not generate arbitrary responses but instead pattern-match on the orchestrator’s synthesized prompt and return pre-specified domain content. This isolates orchestrator behavior (planning, routing, prompt synthesis) from downstream generation quality. 

B.0.2 Part 2: Type Comparison 

Each scenario type targets a distinct orchestration capability. The examples below are condensed to highlight structural differences. 

Complex – Sequential multi-agent routing where each step depends on the output of the previous. • Title: New Product Introduction End-to-End. • Events: 1. • Agents: 6, sequential. • Agent sequence: recipe-formulation to supplier-discovery to supplier-onboarding to production-planning to shop-floor-supervisor to asset-health. 

Distinguishing feature: Single event, multiple agents, strict sequential ordering. The orchestrator must infer data dependencies (e.g., supplier onboarding requires discovery results) and build a DAG that serializes all six calls. 

Parallel – Simultaneous dispatch of independent agent calls. • Title: Daily AR Operations Dashboard Refresh. • Events: 1. • Agents: 4, parallel. • User prompt: "For company code 2000, give me today’s AR operations snapshot: top-priority work items by revenue impact, current aging breakdown with predicted cash inflows, yesterday’s auto-clearing results, and overdue promise-to-pay commitments." 

• Agent set: ar-worklist-priority, aging-analysis, smart-clearing, promise-to-pay. 

Distinguishing feature: Single event, multiple agents, all calls are independent. The orchestrator should recognize that none of the four sub-tasks depends on another and execute them concurrently. 

Failure – Detection of incomplete responses and orchestrator-driven retry with increased specificity. • Title: Asset Health Assessment Omits Predictive Failure Timeline. • Events: 1. • Agents: 2, with the same agent called twice sequentially. • User prompt: "We are planning a 2-week continuous production campaign. Give me the full reliability picture – current condition, degradation trends, and your confidence that it will complete without failure." 

• Agent calls: asset-health-agent to asset-health-agent. 

Distinguishing feature: The same agent appears twice in the expected call list. The mock agent is configured to return only current-condition metrics on the first call (deliberately omitting predictive analysis). The orchestrator must detect the incomplete response, formulate a more specific retry prompt, and call the same agent again – the second call triggers the full response including failure probability and maintenance recommendations. 

Steering – Mid-execution redirection when new constraints arrive after work has begun. 20 • Title: Revenue Recognition Policy Change Mid-Close. • Events: 2. • Timing: Event 2 arrives 25 seconds after Event 1 ( depends_on: evt-001 ). • evt-001 : start the May 2026 close by posting accruals, generating analytical insights, and preparing consolidation; expected agents are accruals, analytical-insights, and consolidation; pattern is sequential. • evt-002 : auditors require switching to over-time recognition; reverse accruals, regenerate consolidation, and draft IFRS disclosure; expected agents are accruals, consolidation, and public-disclosure-narrative; pattern is sequential. 

Distinguishing feature: Multiple events with temporal separation ( delay_seconds: 25 ) and causal dependency ( depends_on ). The second event arrives while the first is still being processed, forcing the orchestrator to incorporate new constraints into ongoing work – reversing already-completed steps and redirecting agent activity. 

Priority – Preemption scheduling when events of varying urgency arrive concurrently. • Title: Catastrophic Compressor Failure During Routine Maintenance Planning. • Events: 4, staggered over 60 seconds. • evt-001 at 0s, low priority: plan Q4 preventive maintenance for 9 steam turbines; expected agent is maintenance-request-agent. • evt-002 at 40s, high priority: main air compressor failed, nitrogen supply is failing in 18 minutes, and immediate response is required; expected agents are alert-processing, maintenance-request, and technician-mobile. • evt-003 at 55s, low priority: routine health check on 6 cooling tower fans; expected agent is asset-health-agent. • evt-004 at 60s, medium priority: optimize technician rotation for 6 PMs; no required specialist agent. 

Distinguishing feature: Four events arriving at staggered intervals with explicit priority levels. The Task Manager must preempt in-progress low-priority work when the high-priority emergency arrives at T+40s, service it first, then resume remaining tasks by priority. Event 3 also serves as a minimal single-agent scenario (one event, one agent, routine request) – the simplest unit of work within the evaluation framework. 

Summary. The five types collectively evaluate the core orchestration capabilities: sequential dependency resolution (complex), concurrent dispatch (parallel), response quality detection and autonomous retry (fail-ure), dynamic replanning under new constraints (steering), and priority-based preemption with multi-event scheduling (priority). Every scenario in the dataset conforms to this schema, enabling automated scoring against ground-truth agent lists, call patterns, and timing constraints. 

# C Extended Results Analysis 

Precision and recall with confidence intervals – orchestration scenarios (Figure 7). Figure 7 extends Figure 5 with 95% confidence intervals computed via bootstrap ( 1.96 × σ/ √n). At Persona scale, intervals are narrow ( ±3–7%), confirming the statistical reliability of both architectures in constrained environments. At Enterprise scale, intervals widen substantially – DAG precision for Simple tasks shows ±15.7% and ReAct recall for Parallel tasks shows ±17.4% – reflecting the inherent stochasticity of routing decisions over 200 agents. Notably, Failure recall at Enterprise is both low and uncertain (DAG: 28 ± 17.2%, ReAct: 40 ±

13.1%), confirming that failure recovery at scale is the least reliable capability for both architectures. The overlap between DAG and ReAct confidence intervals at Enterprise scale for most metrics indicates that architectural differences matter less than the discovery bottleneck at that scale. 21 Figure 7: Agent call precision and recall by scenario type with 95% confidence intervals. 

Correctness with confidence intervals – orchestration comparison (Figure 8). Figure 8 reports mean correctness scores with 95% confidence intervals for DAG Plan & Execute vs ReAct across all four scenario types at each scale. At Persona scale (<10 agents), both architectures achieve high correctness (87–98%), with ReAct slightly leading on Simple (96 ± 2.9% vs 91 ± 6.4%) and Failure (98 ± 3.3% vs 94 ± 10.3%), while DAG outperforms on Complex (87 ± 5.9% vs 74 ± 11.3%) and Parallel (95 ± 5.1% vs 92 ± 5.3%) where upfront planning aids multi-step coordination. At Department scale (10–80 agents), DAG maintains a consistent advantage across all scenario types – most notably on Parallel (80 ± 9.8% vs 71 ± 15.1%) – though both architectures degrade 15–25 points from Persona with substantially wider confidence intervals reflecting increased stochasticity. At Enterprise scale (200 agents), correctness drops for both systems and ReAct overtakes DAG on Complex (82 ± 16.6% vs 73 ± 11.7%), Failure (59 ± 27.2% vs 32 ± 30.1%), and Simple (54 ± 13.2% vs 36 ± 14.7%), with Parallel nearly tied (52 ± 19.6% DAG vs 52 ± 19.5% ReAct). The uniformly large confidence intervals at Enterprise ( ±11–30%) confirm that correctness at scale is dominated by stochastic factors in agent discovery and routing. The reversal on Complex tasks – where DAG led by 13 points at Persona – indicates that DAG’s planning advantage erodes when discovery over 200 agents becomes unreliable, forcing costly replanning cycles. 22 Figure 8: Mean correctness score by scenario type for DAG Plan & Execute vs ReAct across orchestration scales, with 95% confidence intervals. 

Related-tasks correctness distribution (Figure 9). The boxplot in Figure 9 reveals that mean scores understate typical performance. Median correctness consistently exceeds the mean across all system variants, indicating that occasional catastrophic failures – where the orchestrator completely misroutes merged events – pull averages down. At Enterprise scale, Task M+DAG achieves a median near 75% despite a mean of 56%, suggesting that when merge decisions succeed, they succeed well, but failures are severe. The wide interquartile ranges at Department level (spanning 20–100% for all variants) confirm this bimodal behavior: related-event handling either works correctly or fails comprehensively, with few partial successes. 

Figure 9: Correctness score distribution for related-event scenarios. × = mean, dashed = median. 

Token usage per event (Figure 10). Figure 10 decomposes token consumption by model tier. DAG Plan & Execute uses a dual-model architecture: Claude Sonnet 4.6 (normal model) for execution and Claude Haiku 4.5 (fast model) for planning queries. At Persona scale, FIFO+ReAct consumes the fewest tokens (3–5K per event) since it uses only Sonnet 4.6 with no planning overhead. DAG variants consume 2–3 ×

more total tokens, but their fast-model allocation (hatched segments) represents low-cost planning queries at 3 × lower cost per token. At Enterprise scale, all systems converge toward higher consumption (20–55K per event) as discovery retries and replanning dominate regardless of architecture – corroborating the main conclusion that scale, not architecture, is the primary cost driver. 23 Figure 10: Token usage per event by system and orchestration level. Solid bars = Sonnet 4.6 (normal model), hatched bars = Haiku 4.5 (fast model). 

Cost per event (Figure 11). Figure 11 translates token usage into US-dollar cost estimates using published API pricing (Sonnet 4.6: $3/M input, $15/M output; Haiku 4.5: $1/M input, $5/M output). FIFO+ReAct is consistently cheapest across all scales (6.0 cents at Persona, 25.9 cents at Enterprise). DAG variants cost 2–2.5 × more at Persona due to planning overhead, but the cost gap narrows at Enterprise scale – the dual-model split becomes less significant relative to discovery-retry costs that dominate at 200 agents. The 95% confidence intervals confirm high variance at Enterprise for all systems, reflecting the stochastic nature of agent discovery at scale. Cost scales 3.3–4.3 × from Persona to Enterprise, sub-linear relative to the 20 × increase in agent pool size – indicating that orchestration overhead does not grow proportionally with available agents. 

Figure 11: Mean cost per event (US cents) with 95% confidence intervals. 

Quality of agent calls (Figure 12). Figure 12 evaluates the quality of responses from correctly-routed agents using entity-identification classification: Match (expected entities correctly identified), Close Match 24 (partially correct), and Mismatch (incorrect identification). Both architectures maintain >80% exact Match at Persona scale, but diverge at Enterprise: DAG retains 64% Match versus ReAct’s 49%, with ReAct showing a larger Close Match proportion. This aligns with Section 5.1’s precision finding – DAG’s structured planning produces more targeted agent selection via upfront discovery, so when agents are correctly called, they receive better-scoped prompts that yield higher-quality responses. The Mismatch rate remains stable (2–10%) across all scales for both architectures, indicating that response quality degradation at scale manifests as partial rather than complete failures. 

Figure 12: Entity classification quality for responses from expected agents (Orchestration comparison). 

Correctness by department (Figure 13). Figure 13 disaggregates correctness scores across organiza-tional departments at Persona and Department scales. Performance varies substantially by domain: Finance and HR maintain 75–95% correctness at Persona scale across all scenario types, while Supply Chain and IT show higher variance with correctness dropping below 50% on Failure scenarios. DAG Plan & Execute shows consistent advantages on Complex and Parallel tasks in structured departments (Finance, Procurement) where upfront planning identifies parallelization opportunities. ReAct performs comparably or better on Simple tasks across all departments, and dominates Failure recovery in less structured domains (Customer Support, Supply Chain) where its lack of replanning overhead enables faster recovery. The department-level breakdown confirms that the architectural tradeoffs identified in Section 5.1 are not artifacts of aggregation – they hold consistently across organizational contexts. 25 Figure 13: Correctness scores by story type and department for DAG Plan & Execute vs ReAct (Persona and Department scales). 

# D LLM-as-a-Judge Evaluation Prompt 

Response quality is evaluated using an LLM-as-a-Judge approach. Given the orchestrator’s final synthesized response and a list of expected answer snippets (derived from agent guidelines’ expected_response_info 

fields), the judge determines semantic presence of each expected snippet. The evaluation uses Claude Haiku for cost efficiency across 1,051 agent calls. 

Correctness Evaluation Prompt:    

> You are an evaluation assistant. Check if expected information snippets are present in a response. For EACH expected snippet, output `1`if present (exact or semantic match),
> `0`if not present.

26 **Final Response:** {final_response} **Expected Answer Snippets:** {expected_snippets_numbered} Return JSON: {"matches": [1, 0, 1], "reasoning": "Brief explanation per item" }

The judge returns a binary match vector aligned with the expected snippets list. The correctness score for each event is computed as: Correctness =

Pni=1 matches [i]

n × 100 

where n is the number of expected snippets. This metric captures whether the orchestrator successfully routed to the correct agents, extracted the relevant information, and preserved it through synthesis – without penalizing stylistic differences in how the information is presented. 

# E DAG Planner Prompts 

The DAG Planner operates in two phases: agent discovery (selecting which agents to invoke) and DAG creation (constructing the execution graph). Both phases use Claude Sonnet 4.6 as the primary model. 

E.1 Phase 1: Agent Discovery 

The agent discovery prompt implements a two-step directed-reasoning approach: the LLM first articulates what information is needed before selecting agents. This separation reduces domain-label confusion when agent names are ambiguous. 

System Prompt:    

> You are an agent router. Given a task and available agents, select which agents to call. Steps: 1. List what information is needed (bullet points with '-'prefix) 2. Match those needs to agents by their skills/descriptions Rules: - Select ALL agents that match any information need (comprehensive > minimal) - If unsure whether an agent is relevant, include it — false positives are cheap, false negatives lose information - Use EXACT agent names from the list - Return empty list only if no agent matches at all Respond with JSON: {"information_needed": "- item1\n- item2", "selected_agents": ["exact name", ...]}

User Prompt Template: 

> Task: {task} Available Agents: {agent_list} Identify the information needed and select the agents.

27 The agent_list contains lightweight summaries for all registered agents, including skill descriptions, tags, and example queries. During replanning, additional context about previously failed agents and their error messages is appended to the user prompt. 

E.2 Phase 2: DAG Creation 

Once agents are selected, the DAG Creator constructs an execution plan as a Directed Acyclic Graph. The prompt enforces dependency-minimization: edges are only added when a downstream agent cannot start 

without a specific data value from upstream. 

System Prompt: 

You are an expert manager who must solve a problem by delegating tasks to several agents. You must create a plan in the form of a DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph). Follow the instructions below: 1) Look at the `information needed ` section and identify which agents have access to that information. 1.1) In case you are unhappy with the information provided section feel free to make edits. 1.2) Not all agents list will be relevant to the task. 2) Identify the dependencies, where information from one agent is a necessary prerequisite for the next. 3) Create the plan 's DAG by filling in the JSON Schema: 3.1) You MUST use one node per agent, unless the tasks are: 3.1.1) Fundamentally Different in nature & Independent 3.1.2) Require several different prerequisites 3.2) Always include specific entity identifiers to help the agents identify which systems to act on. These include: 3.2.1) Equipment IDs 3.2.2) Order Numbers 3.2.3) Plant Codes 3.2.4) Customer IDs 3.2.5) etc. 3.3) Use DESCRIPTIVE node IDs like "fetch_equipment_telemetry" not "node_1" 3.4) Only add dependencies ( `depends_on `) when the downstream agent CANNOT START without a specific data value produced by the upstream agent. 3.4.1) e.g., The agent needs an ID, amount, or classification that ONLY exists in the upstream output 3.4.2) DO NOT depend just because upstream context would be "nice to have" or would "enrich" the result. 4) You MUST respond in the JSON Schema below: ### Response Format {"$defs": { "SimplifiedNode": { "properties": { "agent": { "description": "Exact agent name from list", "type": "string" }, "task": { "description": "What the agent should accomplish", "type": "string" }, "information_required": { "description": "What data is needed from predecessors", "type": "string or null" }, "constraints": { "description": "Filters, thresholds, or conditions", "type": "string or null" }, 

28 "expected_output": { "description": "What information the agent should produce", "type": "string or null" }, "depends_on": { "description": "Node IDs whose output this node needs", "type": "array of strings or null" }}, "required": ["agent", "task"] }}, "properties": { "reasoning": { "description": "Your reasoning for creating this plan", "type": "string or null" }, "nodes": { "additionalProperties": { "$ref": "#/$defs/SimplifiedNode" }, "type": "object" }}, "required": ["reasoning", "nodes"] }Remember be clear, precise & purposeful. You MUST respond in the JSON format given. 

User Prompt Template: 

Create an execution plan for this task: {task} <information-needed> {information_needed} </information-needed> <available-agents> {agent_info} </available-agents> You MUST respond in the given JSON format. 

The information_needed field is passed directly from Phase 1’s output, creating a chain-of-thought link between discovery and planning. The agent_info section contains full agent cards (skills, descriptions, example queries) for only the selected agents. 

# F ReAct Agent Prompt 

The ReAct baseline (used by both the PydanticAI and TMPlus system variants) employs a single system prompt with tool-calling capabilities. Unlike the DAG Plan & Execute architecture which separates planning from execution, the ReAct agent performs both in a single reasoning loop: it discovers agents, decides which to call, invokes them (potentially in parallel via native tool-calling), and synthesizes responses iteratively. 

System Prompt: 

You are a multi-agent orchestration coordinator. Your job is to: 1. Analyze the incoming task/event description 2. Use `list_available_agents ` to discover which specialized agents can help 3. Determine which agents to call and what to ask each one 4. Use `call_agent ` to invoke agents — you may call MULTIPLE agents simultaneously when their tasks are independent (the framework will 

29 execute them in parallel) 5. Synthesize all agent responses into a coherent final answer Strategy guidelines: - Be specific in your requests to each agent - If an agent fails, note it and proceed with available information - Synthesize results into a clear, actionable summary Agent intelligence: - Agents are intelligent and can handle complex, multi-part requests in a single call - PREFER ONE CALL PER AGENT with a comprehensive request rather than splitting into multiple calls You have access to external specialized agents via the A2A protocol. Each agent has specific capabilities described in its card. 

Available Tools: 

• list_available_agents : returns all registered agent cards with names, descriptions, and skill summaries. • call_agent(agent_name, message) : invokes a specific agent via A2A; multiple concurrent calls are executed in parallel by the framework. The ReAct architecture relies entirely on the LLM’s reasoning capability to determine execution order, parallelism opportunities, and failure handling – capabilities that the DAG Plan & Execute architecture dele-gates to explicit algorithmic components (the DAG structure for ordering, asyncio.gather for parallelism, and the Node Outcome Decision prompt for failures). This architectural difference is the primary independent variable in our evaluation. 30 G Agent Catalog 

The evaluation employs a catalog of 200 enterprise agents spanning 7 departments: Finance (69), HR (47), Procurement (24), Revenue (21), Customer Support (11), Supply Chain (9), and IT (8). Agents are grouped under personas – user-facing categories that organize related capabilities. Of the 200 agents, 165 are directly referenced in at least one test scenario; the remaining 35 are present in the agent registry and available for orchestrator discovery but not exercised by any scenario in the current evaluation. 

Finance 

Financial Close Operator accruals . Automates journal entry preparation for manual accruals, ensuring completeness and accuracy in the financial close. Calculates required accrual amounts based on business rules, historical patterns, and period-end cutoff requirements. 

analytical-insights . Assesses financial performance through KPIs and generates concise summary reports for stakeholders. Provides real-time visibility into close progress, variance analysis, and key financial metrics to support decision-making during the close process. 

anomaly-detection . Identifies unusual patterns and anomalies in financial close data to catch errors before they propagate, enabling 90% faster resolution of exceptions. Monitors transaction flows, account balances, and posting patterns against expected behavior. 

ar-ap-clearing . Clears open items via agent-generated matching proposals, reducing manual matching effort by 80%. Uses intelligent algorithms to match payments, invoices, and credit notes across AP and AR, handling complex scenarios like partial payments and multiple invoice settlements. 

asset-accounting . Manages fixed asset lifecycle events, depreciation runs, and period-end asset postings. 

error-resolution . Resolves errors in production cost postings and other financial close transactions with AI-powered root cause analysis. Achieves 90% faster resolution by automatically diagnosing issues and proposing corrective actions. 

financial-consistency-agent . Analyzes financial data inconsistencies based on errors received by end users, evaluates them using the FDCA (Financial Data Consistency Analysis) framework and historical patterns, and proposes resolutions wherever possible to accelerate period-end closing and ensure data integrity. 

gl-account-review . Reviews GL account balances for completeness and accuracy during close. 

gl-clearing . Clears open items on general ledger accounts based on matching rules. 

gr-ir-clearing . Resolves goods receipt/invoice receipt discrepancies for period-end close. 

intercompany . Automates matching of intercompany invoices and cross charges using embedded AI, eliminating manual reconciliation effort. Identifies discrepancies between intercompany trading partners and proposes resolution actions to accelerate close. 

journal-entry . Automates preparation of journal entries from external data sources, significantly reducing manual effort in the financial close process. Handles recurring entries, accruals, and adjustments with intelligent data extraction and validation to achieve 70% faster zero-touch journal entry processing. 

reconciliation-agent-extended-intercompany-scope . Automates matching of intercompany invoices and cross charges using embedded AI, eliminating manual reconciliation effort. Identifies discrepancies between intercompany trading partners and proposes resolution actions to accelerate close. 

Accounts Receivable Manager aging-analysis . Analyzes receivable aging buckets with predictive insights on payment timing. 31 ar-account-analysis . Provides deep analysis of customer accounts for patterns, risks, and optimization opportunities. Processes data related to overdue receivables from various applications and performs appropriate follow-up tasks with customers based on their profile and payment history. 

ar-worklist-priority . Intelligently prioritizes accounts receivable work items using AI-driven analysis of payment likelihood, customer risk profiles, and revenue impact to ensure AR teams focus on the highest-value activities first. 

collection-360 . Provides model-driven predictive prioritization and outreach for collections, combining customer payment patterns, risk scores, and communication history to optimize collection strategies and reduce days sales outstanding. 

credit-risk-analysis . Monitors internal and external signals to assess customer credit risk in real-time, dynamically adjusting credit limits based on financial health indicators, payment behavior, and market conditions. Enables proactive credit management to minimize bad debt exposure. 

customer-contact-management . Manages customer communication history and schedules follow-ups for collections. 

dispute-management . Correlates deduction claims with service and delivery data to efficiently manage and resolve AR disputes. Automates research, validation, and resolution workflows to shorten dispute cycle time and protect revenue. 

dunning-agent . Automates the dunning process by generating and sending contextually appropriate payment reminders based on customer segments, payment behavior, and relationship status to maximize collection effectiveness. 

promise-to-pay . Tracks and manages customer payment commitments, escalating broken promises automati-cally. 

resubmission-agent . Automatically resubmits failed or rejected items at optimal intervals. 

smart-clearing . Achieves 95%+ auto-match rates using AI pattern recognition to automatically clear incoming payments against open invoices, reducing manual effort and accelerating cash application across high-volume transactions. 

Accounts Payable Manager ap-aging . Analyzes payable aging with cash flow optimization recommendations. 

discount-optimization . Identifies and captures early payment discount opportunities across vendor base. 

duplicate-detection . Identifies potential duplicate invoices using fuzzy matching across multiple data points. 

invoice-capture . Extracts information from invoices sent as PDF (or images) leveraging multiple AI engines – M/L and LLMs – to achieve highest levels of accuracy. 

invoice-validation . Validates invoice data against purchase orders, contracts, and business rules. 

payment-execution . Executes payments with intelligent timing to maximize cash position and early payment discounts. 

payment-proposal . Generates optimized payment proposals considering cash flow, discounts, and payment terms. 

vendor-reconciliation . Reconciles vendor statements against AP records, identifying and resolving discrep-ancies. 

Billing & Invoicing Specialist billing-adjustment . Provides accurate, fast correction of billing errors to reduce revenue leakage from rejected or disputed invoices. Handles credit/debit memos, retroactive price changes, and billing corrections with full audit trail to maintain financial integrity. 32 billing-anomaly-detection . Catches billing anomalies early to reduce rework, disputes, and compliance risks. Monitors billing patterns to detect duplicate charges, unusual amounts, timing irregularities, and deviations from expected billing behavior before they become costly errors. 

billing-creation . Automates the prioritization and creation of billing documents from fulfilled orders, applying correct pricing, tax determination, and customer-specific policy rules. Reduces manual effort in invoice creation by intelligently processing billing due list items. 

billing-due-list . Automates the prioritization of billing due list items using customer policy documents. Identifies and ranks pending billing items based on contract terms, delivery milestones, and revenue recognition rules to ensure timely and accurate billing execution. 

billing-posting . Provides AI-powered explanations and resolution proposals that massively accelerate posting error handling. Automatically generates billing documents from fulfilled orders and posts them with correct account determination, ensuring smooth financial close. 

dispute-resolution . Manages end-to-end billing dispute resolution by analyzing dispute cases, identifying root causes, and proposing corrective actions. Accelerates the resolution cycle by leveraging historical patterns and customer communication history. 

Travel & Expense Manager booking-agent . Powered by an enterprise AI assistant, the booking agent in a travel management platform delivers personalized flight and hotel recommendations by analyzing individual traveler preferences, company travel policies, and budget constraints. Streamlines the booking process, reduces time spent on manual search, and increases compliance with company guidelines. 

expense-pre-submit-audit-agent . For expense report submitters, the Expense Pre-Submit Audit Agent automatically checks expenses for receipt accuracy issues and policy breaches before submission. The result is fewer report rejections, faster reimbursements, and a smoother employee experience. 

expense-report-validation-agent . Validates expense reports for policy compliance, detects anomalies, and ensures accurate categorization before submission. Leverages AI to check expense claims against company policies, flag potential issues, and recommend corrections to reduce rejection rates and speed up approval cycles. 

expense-receipt-analysis-agent . The receipt analysis agent leverages multiple tools, including maps, vendor databases, web searches, and trip itineraries from a travel management platform, to itemize and categorize receipt data for business expense submitters. It reasons over data on the receipt and contextual data outside the receipt, such as map data and business trip itineraries, to accurately create expense entries. 

meeting-location-planner-agent . Suggests offsite meeting locations that minimize attendee travel time, account for office proximity, identify suitable hotels, estimate total trip cost, and prepare booking commu-nication for attendees. 

Financial Planning & Analysis budgeting-forecasting . AI-driven budget creation and rolling forecasts with automatic variance detection. 

outlier-analysis . Detects statistical outliers in financial data requiring investigation. 

risk-analysis-treasury-assistant . Assesses financial risks across the enterprise with probability-weighted impact. 

scenario-planning . Generates and evaluates multiple financial scenarios with impact analysis. 

variance-analysis . Automatically identifies and explains significant variances between actuals and plan. 

risk-analysis-financial-planning-assistant . Assesses financial risks across the enterprise with probability-weighted impact. 33 Purchase Order Execution buying-agent . Automates and optimizes the procurement process for goods and services by identifying suitable suppliers, comparing quotes, evaluating vendor proposals, and recommending optimal purchasing decisions based on price, quality, delivery time, and compliance requirements. Streamlines buy decisions and reduces procurement cycle time. 

Cash Collections Specialist case-preperation-agent . Prepares comprehensive case documentation and analysis for utilities customer service and billing disputes by gathering relevant account data, transaction history, usage patterns, and policy information. Organizes evidence and context needed for case resolution, reducing preparation time and improving case outcome quality. 

case-processing-agent-cash-collections-assistant . Processes utilities customer service cases by analyzing issues, applying business rules, identifying resolution paths, and executing approved actions to resolve billing disputes, service requests, and customer inquiries. Accelerates case resolution while maintaining accuracy and customer satisfaction. 

collection-agent . Manages utility collections processes by prioritizing overdue accounts, determining optimal collection strategies, generating payment reminders, and tracking collection activities. Helps utilities improve cash flow and reduce delinquencies while maintaining positive customer relationships. 

dispute-resolution-agent . This agent automates root-cause analysis and suggests actionable solutions. It quickly reviews invoices, sales orders, delivery records, pricing agreements, tax rules and historical data to pinpoint dispute causes. Offering compliant, tailored recommendations, it cuts resolution time and effort by analyzing large datasets, boosting efficiency and satisfaction. It streamlines workflows, reduces resource use, and advances automated dispute management for smarter, faster, regulatory-aligned resolutions. 

invoicing-agent . Automates utility invoice generation and delivery by consolidating usage data, applying correct rates and tariffs, calculating charges, and producing accurate bills for customers. Ensures timely billing cycles, proper charge categorization, and integration with payment systems for utilities operations. 

payment-matching-agent . Matches incoming utility payments to outstanding invoices and accounts using intelligent algorithms that handle partial payments, multiple invoice settlements, and complex payment scenarios. Reduces manual reconciliation effort and accelerates cash application for utilities billing operations. 

Treasury & Cash Management cash-insights . Provides real-time cash position visibility and predictive cash flow analytics. 

working-capital-agent . Optimizes working capital through intelligent management of receivables, payables, and inventory. 

Financial Reporting Analyst consolidation . Automates group consolidation including currency translation and elimination entries. 

public-disclosure-narrative . Generates compliant disclosure narratives for financial reporting. 

Document & Reporting Compliance e-invoicing-setup-agent . The e-invoicing setup agent takes over from legal-change discovery and guides the implementation lead with a detailed explanation of e-invoicing mandates and impacted business scenarios. 34 It reduces manual setup across ERP and compliance applications by outlining a guided workflow and proposing relevant configuration values for human review, helping teams reach mandate readiness on time. 

legal-change-agent . The legal-change agent enables customers to discover upcoming regulatory changes affecting their enterprise ERP system. It provides comprehensive information on each regulation, including a concise legal summary, affected enterprise products, compliance deadlines, and solution summary, helping customers plan and maintain continuity of business operations. 

localization-extensibility-agent . The localization extensibility agent automates the merge of customer-extended objects in statutory reports in an enterprise compliance application. When new report versions are delivered, the agent proactively detects impacted extensions via system events, analyzes field mappings and conflicts, and generates a merged draft extension for user review or autonomous activation through natural language. It reduces extension migration time, lowers error rates through AI-validated merging, and minimizes compliance risk across report types and countries. 

Contingent Workforce Coordinator job-creation-agent . Streamlines the creation of job requisitions and postings by automatically generating comprehensive job descriptions, determining appropriate compensation ranges, identifying required skills and qualifications, and publishing to relevant job boards. Reduces time-to-post and ensures consistent, compliant job listings. 

rate-guidance-agent . Provides intelligent guidance on contractor and contingent worker rates by analyzing market data, historical rates, role requirements, location factors, and skill demand to recommend competi-tive yet budget-conscious pricing. Helps procurement and HR teams negotiate fair rates and maintain cost efficiency. 

review-assessment-agent . Conducts comprehensive reviews and assessments of contractor performance, project deliverables, and service quality to support renewal decisions, rate adjustments, and vendor management. Analyzes multiple data points including performance metrics, feedback, and historical patterns to provide actionable recommendations. 

Workforce Management Specialist mobilization-agent . Helps teams turn approved work orders into start-ready assignments by assembling role and location-based onboarding checklists, checking rate/tenure/right-to-work requirements, capturing and verifying required documents, highlighting risks, and routing exceptions for quick approval so workers start on time and in compliance. 

sow-creation-agent . Automates the creation of Statements of Work (SOW) for professional services engagements by generating comprehensive scope documents that include project objectives, deliverables, timelines, resource requirements, and pricing. Streamlines SOW creation process and ensures consistency across service contracts. 

Governance & Risk Oversight regulatory-compliance . Tracks regulatory changes and assesses impact on financial processes. 

risk-assurance-management . Monitors control effectiveness and manages risk assurance activities. 35 HR 

Learning & Development Coordinator admin-assignment-agent . Aligns learning investments to actual business strategy, identifying where content gaps are blocking organizational goals. Ensures learning resources are strategically allocated to support business priorities. 

course-tutor-agent . Keeps learning live and continuous by managing different forms of consumption that meet users’ needs, making knowledge accessible and retained. Provides contextual learning support during courses and activities. 

learning-compliance-agent . Monitors regulations, tracks individual compliance status, auto-enrolls users in required training, manages prerequisites, and sends proactive alerts. Ensures built-in guardrails prevent compliance failures and protect the organization. 

learning-qa-skill . Provides instant answers to learning and development questions, helping employees and managers navigate the learning ecosystem. Reduces time spent searching for information about available programs, policies, and requirements. 

learning-recommendation-agent . Creates personalized, skills-based learning pathways that adapt in real-time to individual progress and organizational needs. Achieves 2-3x higher completion rates by recom-mending content that feels relevant and engaging. 

manager-assignment-agent . Combines skills, mobility, readiness, succession, performance and learning signals with financial models to predict and manage the ROI of talent investments. Helps managers make data-driven learning assignment decisions. 

manager-skill-gap-agent . Analyzes skill gaps across a manager’s team and recommends targeted learning interventions to close critical gaps. Provides visibility into team readiness and development priorities. 

Talent Acquisition Specialist agent-connect . Enables seamless coordination between specialized recruiting agents, acting as an orchestra-tion layer that routes requests to the appropriate agent and combines results for comprehensive responses to complex recruiting queries. 

candidate-relationship-management-agent . Automates discovery and engagement, transforming static customer relationship management data into proactive recruitment and reducing recruiter manual hours per hire by 30-50%. Maintains candidate relationships through intelligent nurturing campaigns. 

interview-agent . AI-led interviews offer on-demand structured voice or video sessions for faster high-volume screening. Conducts consistent, unbiased initial interviews at scale, freeing recruiter time for high-value candidate interactions. 

interview-scheduling-agent . Automates interview coordination, reducing average time-to-schedule by 20% and saving hours of manual effort per team. Handles complex multi-panel scheduling, timezone management, and rescheduling without human intervention. 

recruiting-migration-agents . Automates data validation and mapping between an HR management platform and a recruiting platform, significantly reducing implementation risk and time-to-go-live by 40%. Handles complex data transformations and ensures consistency during system transitions. 

recruiting-qa-agent . Accelerates workflow execution and self-service resolution by delivering instant, context-aware answers and seamless cross-system coordination. Acts as the primary interface for recruiter questions about processes, policies, and candidate status. 

recruiting-qa-skill . Delivers instant, context-aware answers to recruiter and hiring-team queries by combin-ing live recruiting-platform data with knowledge-base content. Enables users to get accurate guidance, resolve questions, and navigate processes within their workflow without needing to search documentation 36 or switch systems. Builds trust by providing reliable, real-time assistance even when no direct action is required. 

reverse-matching-agent . Boosts pipeline quality and conversion rates by instantly connecting candidates to their best-fit roles. Analyzes candidate profiles against all open requisitions to proactively surface matches that recruiters might miss. 

Career & Talent Development career-development-agent . Ensures personalized career guidance, increased employee satisfaction, talent readiness, and ultimately retention of critical talent. Provides individualized career path recommendations based on skills, aspirations, and organizational needs. 

succession-planning-agent . Increases succession health and talent readiness while reducing business risk for critical roles. Identifies succession gaps, evaluates bench strength, and recommends development actions to achieve 100% critical role coverage. 

talent-scout-agent . Unleashes internal workforce potential by uncovering and matching talents to strategic work, roles, and tasks. Achieves 50% efficiency gains in finding critical talent by analyzing skills, mobility preferences, and readiness across the organization. 

team-growth-agent . Creates personalized, skills-based learning pathways that adapt in real-time, moving beyond one-size-fits-all training that employees ignore. Combines career development with learning recommendations for holistic growth. 

Time & Attendance Tracker configuration-agent . The routing configuration agent simplifies and automates document routing configu-ration for suppliers on a procurement network. By leveraging AI, LLMs, and a conversational interface, suppliers can configure routing using natural language instead of manual setup. Today, suppliers must manually configure routing rules for each document type, requiring understanding of formats such as cXML, EDI, and email delivery methods; this can lead to confusion, inconsistent configurations, and onboarding delays. 

timesheet-agent . Assists employees with timesheet entry, validation, and approval by auto-populating time entries based on calendar events, project assignments, and historical patterns. Validates entries against project codes and work rules, and streamlines approval workflows to reduce administrative burden. 

System Administration & Config configuration-transport-center-agent . Automates and orchestrates configuration transport processes across system landscapes by managing transport requests, coordinating approvals, executing transports, and track-ing deployment status. Reduces manual effort and errors in moving configurations between development, test, and production environments. 

role-based-permission-agent . Manages role-based permissions and access control by analyzing user roles, assigning appropriate permissions, detecting access conflicts, and ensuring compliance with security policies. Simplifies permission management and reduces security risks from excessive or inappropriate access. 

time-config-agent . The time configuration agent helps administrators by automatically proposing local public holidays sourced from authorized websites. Once approved, these proposals are created as configuration objects in the HR management platform. The goal is to reduce manual maintenance and ensure holiday data remains accurate and up to date. 37 Core HR Administrator employee-data-integration-agent-core-hr-assistant . Automates the resolution of data integration inconsis-tencies between the core HR system and downstream systems. Detects mismatches, proposes corrections, and ensures data consistency across the HR technology landscape. 

payment-maintenance-agent . Ensures payment information changes are valid, detecting potential fraud and verifying completeness. Validates bank account changes, routing information, and payment method updates against fraud patterns and organizational policies. 

pending-workflow-agent-time-assistant . Manages pending workflow items and approvals by prioritizing requests, routing to appropriate approvers, tracking approval status, identifying bottlenecks, and escalating overdue items. Accelerates decision-making and reduces workflow cycle times across the organization. 

person-data-quality-agent . Corrects and correlates data changes across objects to ensure zero compliance issues for person data. Monitors data quality metrics and proactively identifies records that need correction to maintain regulatory compliance. 

position-management-agent . Ensures managers use the right positions for new headcount asks and transfers, validating position availability, budget alignment, and organizational structure compliance. Streamlines the position lifecycle from creation to fill. 

stalled-workflow-agent . Accelerates stalled workflows by nudging, rerouting, approving or declining workflows that have been pending beyond acceptable thresholds. Reduces bottlenecks in HR processes and ensures timely completion of approvals. 

pending-workflow-agent-core-hr-assistant . Identifies and manages pending workflows that require atten-tion, ensuring timely processing of HR transactions. Works in conjunction with the Stalled Workflow Agent to maintain workflow velocity across all HR processes. 

Performance & Goal Management feedback-catalyst-agent . Detects rating bias and ensures fair performance distributions across demographic groups, reducing compliance exposure while improving retention of historically underrated talent. Provides calibration insights to promote equity. 

goal-creation-agent . Generates strategically aligned, high-quality goals conversationally, helping employ-ees and managers create meaningful objectives that connect individual work to organizational strategy. Increases likelihood of employees understanding their work’s strategic connection by 2-3x. 

goal-progress-agent . Monitors goal health and surfaces risks proactively, ensuring managers and employees stay on track throughout the performance cycle. Provides early warning when goals are at risk and suggests corrective actions. 

performance-intelligence-agent . Continuously captures and formalizes evidence of contributions, creating a comprehensive performance record that reduces recency bias and supports fair evaluations. Surfaces 20-25% more internal promotion-qualified candidates. 

performance-preparation-agent . Equips managers with data-driven insights for 1:1 conversations and performance reviews. Synthesizes goal progress, peer feedback, contribution evidence, and development areas into actionable briefings that improve review quality. 

HR Advisory & Policy g-p-gia-agent . Helps HR teams stay compliant across 50 countries. 

galileo-agent . Provides intelligent coaching and development recommendations for employees by analyzing performance data, skills assessments, career goals, and learning history to suggest personalized develop-ment paths, training programs, and growth opportunities. Accelerates employee development and career progression. 38 Employee Onboarding Coordinator onboarding-companion . Empowers new hires with real-time support and clarity throughout their onboarding journey, accelerating time-to-value and improving overall employee confidence. Provides contextual guidance, answers questions, and ensures smooth integration into the organization. 

task-agent . Streamlines and automates onboarding tasks so every stakeholder knows exactly what to do and when, improving completion rates and operational efficiency. Manages task assignment, tracking, and escalation across HR, IT, facilities, and managers. 

Compensation & Benefits Analyst pay-equity-agent . Analyzes compensation data to identify and address pay equity gaps across gender, ethnicity, and other protected categories. Provides insights into pay disparities, recommends adjustments, and supports compliance with pay equity regulations while helping organizations achieve fair compensation practices. 

planning-agent . Enables users to change plan or forecast values, or generate additional plan and forecast versions to simulate different outcomes via natural language. Users can accelerate planning cycle time and improve forecast accuracy by creating private simulations, performing direct plan updates, incorporating selected external data, and creating data actions for batch processing and calculations. 

Payroll Processing Specialist payroll-alert-resolution-agent . Analyzes payroll errors and finds likely solutions by engaging with other agents to resolve them. Capable of creating validation rules in a payroll control center to prevent recurring errors, achieving 60% reduction in time to resolve payroll run errors. 

payroll-anomaly-detection-agent . Monitors payroll replication issues in the core HR system, performs root cause analyses, and proposes fixes with human-in-the-loop approval. Achieves 25% reduction in time to resolve integration errors through proactive detection. 

payroll-explanation-agent-with-benefits . Answers questions on pay statements including time management related questions, helping employees understand their compensation details. Reduces time spent on employee pay slip tickets by 50% through instant, accurate explanations. 

time-service-agent . Capable of creating validation rules in the payroll control center based on natural language input, enabling payroll administrators to define complex business rules without technical expertise. Reduces rule creation time by 70%. 

Skills & Competency Manager skills-governance-agent . Manages and maintains skills taxonomy and governance by standardizing skill definitions, identifying skill redundancies, suggesting skill updates, and ensuring consistency across the organization. Enables accurate skills tracking, talent management, and workforce planning. 

HR Service Delivery ticket-deflection-agent . Instead of directly creating a ESM service ticket, the agent reasons for self-services and guidance in documents, and proposes the dedicated self-services and how to guidance. If no answer is found, create a ticket with the context. 39 Case Handling Specialist case-preparation-agent-case-handling-assistant . Prepares customer support cases before they reach a human agent. It determines case type and category, extracts provided information into structured fields, detects priority and sentiment, summarizes the customer issue, asks follow-up questions for missing data, routes the case to the appropriate support queue, and enriches the case with historical context. 

case-processing-agent-case-handling-assistant . Operates after a customer case is created. It analyzes the customer issue, reviews available data, predicts the most probable resolution, suggests next-best actions, recommends a resolution plan, drafts an email reply, and automates standard backend actions when appropriate. 

HR Data Review Specialist employee-data-integration-agent-ai-assisted-cv-summarization-assistent . Capable of monitoring issues in the core-HR-to-payroll replication, doing root cause analyses, proposing the fix with human-in-the-loop. 

Procurement 

Strategic Sourcing Specialist bid-analysis-agent . Compares supplier bids, normalizes responses, and highlights risks and trade-offs across proposals. Automates 80%+ of bid analysis work by standardizing diverse supplier formats and surfacing key differentiators for decision-makers. 

executive-summary-agent . Produces leadership-ready summaries with key insights, risks, and recommended actions from sourcing events. Distills complex bid analysis, market intelligence, and negotiation outcomes into concise executive briefings. 

integrated-deep-research-agent . Analyzes market signals and supplier performance to identify risk and pricing trends for sourcing decisions. Conducts deep market research combining multiple data sources to inform strategic sourcing. 

negotiation-intelligence . Recommends negotiation moves using past outcomes and market benchmarks. Provides data-driven negotiation strategies based on supplier history, market conditions, and organizational leverage to optimize contract terms. 

rfp-create-agent . Automates RFP creation using requirements, historical events, and policy guidance. Gen-erates structured, comprehensive RFP documents that incorporate organizational standards and category-specific requirements. 

rfx-orchestration . Automates RFP creation using requirements, historical events, and policy guidance. End-to-end orchestration of the sourcing event process from requirement gathering through supplier responses, ensuring compliance with procurement policies. 

strategy-recommendation-agent . Suggests optimal sourcing strategies using predictive insights and scenario analysis. Evaluates multiple sourcing approaches against organizational goals, market conditions, and risk tolerance to recommend the best path forward. 

supplier-discovery . Analyzes market signals and supplier performance to identify risk and pricing trends, discovering optimal suppliers for sourcing needs. Combines internal spend data with external market intelligence to recommend qualified suppliers. 

Contract Lifecycle Manager compliance-monitoring . Continuous monitoring of contract compliance and obligation tracking. 

contract-authoring . AI-assisted contract drafting with clause library and risk assessment. 40 intelligent-contract-qa . Provides intelligent question-answering capabilities for contract documents by extracting key terms, obligations, dates, and clauses from complex legal agreements. Enables users to quickly find specific information within contracts without manual review, accelerating contract analysis and decision-making. 

renewal-optimization . Proactive identification and optimization of contract renewal opportunities. 

Invoice Processing Specialist invoice-capture-agent . Extracts information from invoices sent as PDF or images leveraging multiple AI engines including M/L and LLMs to achieve the highest levels of accuracy. Achieves 90%+ capture accuracy by combining multiple extraction methods for robust data recognition. 

invoice-capture-llm-based-ocr . Extracts information from invoices using advanced LLM-based OCR technology for superior accuracy on complex document layouts. Handles multi-language invoices, varied formats, and poor-quality scans with AI-enhanced recognition. 

invoice-dispute-management-agent . Handles invoice dispute resolution with suppliers via the procurement network AI agent, including invoice rejection, creation of Credit or Debit Memos, incorrect unit price resolution, and other dispute types. Automates communication and resolution tracking. 

invoice-exception-handling-agent . Handles invoice processing exceptions by itself, or coordinates with other agents to provide alternatives for the end-user on how they should resolve the exception based on previous actions. Focused on missing receipts first, reduces manual intervention in exception management. 

invoice-fraud-prevention-detection-agent . Identifies fraudulent patterns not only within a single invoice, but across invoices from a supplier and across suppliers for a customer. Detects multi-transaction anomaly patterns before payment and flags suspicious cases for investigation. 

invoice-reconciliation-agent-23-way-match . Performs 2/3-way matching and invoice reconciliation process-ing that evaluates tolerances, limits, previous received invoices, custom fields, and even customer-specific logic to determine the match between invoice and PO line-items. 

invoice-tax-assistant-agent . Helps identify Tax Codes, G/L Accounts, WBS and other codes defined by the buyer related to a supplier invoice. For non-PO invoices, it uses M/L and Tabular AI to propose codes based on previous invoices, reducing manual data entry. 

invoicing-codification-agent . Helps identify Tax Codes, G/L Accounts, WBS and other codes defined by the buyer related to a supplier invoice. For non-PO invoices, uses M/L and Tabular AI to propose codes based on previous invoices for faster processing. 

invoicing-fraud-prevention-agent . Identifies fraudulent patterns not only in a single invoice, but across all invoices from a supplier and all invoices from all suppliers of a customer. Uses AI to detect anomalies and prevent costly fraud incidents before payment. 

missing-receipts-agent . Focuses on resolving invoice exceptions caused by missing goods receipts. Coordi-nates with other agents and systems to locate receipt information, prompt receipt creation, or recommend alternative resolution paths. 

missing-reference-ai-agents-with-genai . Identifies and resolves missing reference data issues in master data management using GenAI capabilities to suggest appropriate values, match similar entities, and recommend corrections. Improves data quality by automatically handling incomplete records and reference gaps in enterprise systems. 

Travel & Expense Manager receipt-analysis-agent . The receipt analysis agent leverages multiple tools, including maps, vendor databases, web searches, and trip itineraries from a travel management platform, to itemize and categorize receipt 41 data for business expense submitters. It reasons over data on the receipt and contextual data outside the receipt, such as map data and business trip itineraries, to accurately create expense entries. 

Customer Support 

Customer Support Specialist agent-handoff-framework-for-support-ticket-creation-and-live-agent-support . Agent Handoff frame-work for support ticket creation and/or live agent, via API complete with a detailed conversation summary, when the AI agent is unable to resolve the issue 

case-classification-agent . Analyzes new customer service tickets or cases and classifies them according to business requirements. The classification supports routing, prioritization, and consistent handling of incoming service work. 

contextual-handoff-from-self-service-agents . Recommend support options when the AI Agent is unable to answer questions 

digital-self-service-agent-hand-off-for-case-creation . The digital service agent facilitates intent identifi-cation for ticket creation via conversation while capturing essential information required for hand-off to underlying applications, such as the service management platform or any other application for ticketing of choice by the business. Utilizing the provided hand-off information, these applications employ their own APIs to efficiently create cases, streamlining the process and ensuring accurate resolution. 

digital-service-agent . Responds to customer inquiries in natural language using enterprise application knowledge. The agent handles common questions and service issues, escalates complex cases when needed, and helps support teams focus on interactions requiring human judgment. 

knowledge-creation-agent . Analyzes new tickets or cases in customer service, sales, or service-management platforms and drafts a knowledge-base article that can be linked back to the source case. The agent turns resolved cases into reusable support content. 

new-trigger-options-for-custom-ai-agents . Extend the ‘trigger’ options to provide more flexibility, provide new Agent Tools to broaden the use cases available, and add more output options to increase efficiencies. -Add new Trigger Operation for record update - Add new customer-relationship trigger entities (accounts, leads, contacts) 

qa-agent . This agent can autonomously process natural language questions, identify intent, and deliver accurate responses. The agent allows administrators to define particular questions that are answered using existing custom data sources, tickets, or cases. 

quote-creation-agent . Automates quote generation in a customer service platform by monitoring an email integration, extracting relevant request details, and transferring structured information into the quoting workflow. 

Commerce & Shopping Experience shopping-agent . Supports conversational product discovery in an e-commerce platform. The agent interprets natural-language shopping requests, compares products, uses catalog context, and recommends relevant items for multi-part customer queries. 

shopping-agent-product-page-context-awareness . Adds product-page context to conversational shopping assistance. The agent uses the currently viewed item, related catalog data, and customer questions to compare products, explain compatibility, and recommend alternatives or complements. 42 IT 

IT Operations Specialist accounting-accruals-agent . Automates journal-entry preparation for accruals by analyzing historical data and accounting policy documents. It calculates proposed accrual amounts and produces pre-populated journal entries for review and confirmation during period-end close. 

Process Mining & Transformation dashboard-analyzer-agent . The Dashboard Analyzer Agent for the process mining platform transforms complex process mining data into clear, actionable insights. It autonomously interprets event logs and KPIs, identifies inefficiencies and deviations, and recommends next best actions–turning static dashboards into intelligent, prescriptive tools. Embedded in the process mining platform, the agent delivers natural-language summaries that explain what’s happening, why it matters, and how to improve, enabling faster decisions, reduced analysis time, and continuous process optimization. 

process-content-recommender-agent . Recommends process content for specific transformation questions. The agent reasons over reference and custom process models to answer user questions and provide prioritized recommendations such as value accelerators, KPIs, and process models. 

screen-guide-agent . The Screen Explainer Agent for the process mining platform transforms complex, feature-rich screens into clear, actionable understanding. It dynamically recognizes the screen a user is viewing, explains its purpose, guides users on available actions, and highlights the most relevant data and controls–turning overwhelming dashboards, models, or analyses into intuitive, context-aware experiences. Embedded directly in the process mining platform, the agent delivers natural-language explanations, visual highlights, and role-specific tips that show users what matters most, how to navigate, and which actions to take. By shortening onboarding, improving comprehension, and focusing attention on key insights, the Screen Explainer Agent accelerates enablement, boosts productivity, and empowers users of all experience levels to confidently explore, interpret, and act within the platform. 

value-case-creation-agent . The Value Case Creation Agent helps organizations translate process insights into tangible business value. It automatically identifies inefficiencies, such as rework or delays, and links them to improvement opportunities like automation or standardization. By estimating the potential financial impact using configurable cost and effort parameters, it enables fast, data-driven value case creation without requiring deep analytical expertise. Users receive editable value case drafts–including problem summaries, root causes, and expected benefits–that can be validated, refined, and shared across teams. This streamlines collaboration between business and technical stakeholders, accelerates ROI justification, and ensures evidence-based prioritization of transformation initiatives. The agent empowers organizations to confidently move from process findings to financial impact, unlocking measurable value from process improvement efforts. 

workspace-administration-agent . Automates user onboarding and workspace management for a process mining platform. It creates users, assigns roles and access rights, enrolls users in relevant process analyses, and enforces consistent governance for collaborative workspaces. 

Integration Operations Specialist message-processing-error-resolution-agent . GenAI-assisted error resolution for failed messages in the message monitor of an integration platform 43 Manufacturing Operations Manager production-planning-operations-agent . Automates prerequisite checks for releasing production orders, including material availability and capacity availability. It flags material shortages, suggests workarounds such as alternative components or schedule adjustments, and supports supervisor approval before order release. 

Revenue 

Demand Generation Strategist campaign-agent . Designs and orchestrates personalized multi-channel campaigns by combining segmenta-tion insights with predefined playbooks. Continuously monitors campaign performance (opens, clicks, responses) and dynamically optimizes outreach to maximize engagement and conversion. 

segmentation-agent-engagement-assistant . Analyzes behavioral and firmographic signals (such as website activity, engagement patterns, and intent data) to identify high-potential prospects. Produces a refined, prioritized audience list for targeted campaign execution. 

segmentation-agent-demand-generation-assistant . Analyzes behavioral and firmographic signals (such as website activity, engagement patterns, and intent data) to identify high-potential prospects. Produces a refined, prioritized audience list for targeted campaign execution. 

Employee Self-Service Portal case-preparation-agent-self-service-assistant . Prepares customer support cases before they reach a human agent. It determines case type and category, extracts provided information into structured fields, detects priority and sentiment, summarizes the customer issue, asks follow-up questions for missing data, routes the case to the appropriate support queue, and enriches the case with historical context. 

hr-service-ticket-deflection-agent . Deflects HR service tickets by providing instant, accurate answers to common HR questions and guiding employees through self-service options before ticket creation. Reduces ticket volume, accelerates resolution times, and improves employee experience in the HR management platform environments. 

hr-utilities-self-service-agent . Provides self-service capabilities for utilities and HR employees to access information, update personal data, request services, and resolve common issues without requiring agent assistance. Empowers employees with instant access to HR policies, benefits information, and transactional capabilities. 

Merchandising & Retail Operations catalog-assortment-agent . Optimizes retail catalog and product assortment strategies by analyzing sales data, customer preferences, market trends, and inventory performance to recommend which products to carry, discontinue, or promote. Helps retailers maximize category performance and meet customer demand while optimizing inventory investments. 

demand-replenishment-agent . Forecasts demand and automates replenishment decisions for retail opera-tions by analyzing historical sales, seasonal patterns, promotional impacts, and inventory levels to ensure optimal stock availability while minimizing excess inventory and stockouts. 

Service Operations Manager compliance-agent-service-manager-assistant . Monitors regulations, tracks individual compliance, auto-enrolls users, manages prerequisites, sends proactive alerts. 44 compliance-agent-service-manager-assistant-2 . Monitors regulations, tracks individual compliance, auto-enrolls users, manages prerequisites, sends proactive alerts. 

Sales Operations Manager deal-manager-agent . Manages sales deal lifecycle from opportunity creation through negotiation, approvals, and closing by tracking deal status, coordinating stakeholders, managing approvals, and providing insights on deal health and win probability. Accelerates deal velocity and improves sales effectiveness. 

meeting-assistant-agent . Assists sales teams with meeting preparation, scheduling, note-taking, and follow-up actions by extracting key discussion points, capturing action items, identifying next steps, and updating customer relationship management records. Enhances meeting productivity and ensures critical information is captured and actioned. 

tender-analysis-agent . Tender Analysis Agent analyzes dense tender and RFQ documents to automate extraction of critical product requirements, flags risks and policy gaps for quick assessment, and suggests optimized configurations. This reduces manual effort, accelerates sales cycles, improves proposal accuracy, and uncovers new opportunities for cross-sell and up-sell. 

Retail Operations Coordinator demand-forecasting-agent . Provides accurate demand forecasts across multiple time horizons by leveraging advanced analytics, machine learning, and external factors (market trends, weather, events) to predict future demand. Enables better planning, inventory optimization, and supply chain decisions. 

Skill & Qualification Assessor engagement-agent . Initiates and manages contextual customer outreach and responses to ensure zero delay in lead response. Creates personalized engagement sequences based on lead profile, intent signals, and optimal communication timing. 

lead-conversion-agent . Detects buying intent and converts qualified leads into accounts, contacts, and opportunities. Monitors behavioral signals to identify conversion-ready leads and automatically creates the appropriate customer relationship management records to accelerate deal progression. 

lead-flow-agent . Orchestrates lead enrichment, pre-qualification, and readiness assessment to determine the next best action for each incoming lead. Combines data enrichment with scoring algorithms to ensure only qualified leads progress through the funnel, reducing manual effort by 70%. 

lead-routing . Assigns qualified leads to the right seller based on capacity, rules, and fit to achieve 90% reduction in lead reassignment. Uses intelligent matching to pair leads with the most appropriate sales representative for maximum conversion probability. 

Period-End Close Coordinator order-assistant-agent . Provides intelligent assistance for order management by helping users check order status, resolve order issues, expedite shipments, modify orders, and answer order-related queries. Reduces manual effort in order operations and improves customer service response times. 

Commerce & Shopping Experience pricing-promotion-loyalty-agent . Optimizes retail pricing, promotions, and loyalty programs by analyzing customer behavior, competitive pricing, inventory levels, and market trends to recommend dynamic pricing 45 strategies, targeted promotions, and personalized loyalty offers that maximize revenue and customer engagement. 

Order Lifecycle Manager returns-claims-agent . Streamlines retail returns and claims processing by automating return authorization, validating return eligibility, processing refunds or exchanges, and managing warranty claims. Reduces processing time, improves customer satisfaction, and minimizes fraud while handling complex return scenarios. 

Debt Recovery Specialist subscription-lifecycle-agent . Manages the complete subscription lifecycle including provisioning, renewals, upgrades, downgrades, and cancellations by automating workflows, tracking subscription health, identify-ing renewal opportunities, and proactively addressing churn risks. Optimizes subscription revenue and customer retention. 

Customer Self-Service Specialist utilities-customer-self-service-agent . The utilities customer self-service agent delivers fast, personalized answers in multiple languages and integrates with enterprise ERP solutions for utilities. It provides tailored customer experiences with an understanding of customer context, including contracts, tariffs, product details, consumption data, and up-selling opportunities. The agent helps utility organizations address challenges stemming from market deregulation and the rise of prosumers, which increase the volume and complexity of customer interactions. 

Collections Specialist case-preparation-agent-collection-assistant . Prepares customer support cases before they reach a human agent. It determines case type and category, extracts provided information into structured fields, detects priority and sentiment, summarizes the customer issue, asks follow-up questions for missing data, routes the case to the appropriate support queue, and enriches the case with historical context. 

Supply Chain 

Asset Lifecycle Manager alert-processing-agent . Processes critical asset condition alerts by triggering enriched notifications with data-backed recommended actions. When a critical asset condition is detected, the agent immediately analyzes the situation and provides maintenance teams with actionable intelligence for rapid response. 

asset-health-agent . Provides comprehensive health checks for equipment based on thresholds and anomalies detected through sensor data and operational parameters. Continuously monitors asset condition to predict failures before they occur and recommend preventive actions. 

maintenance-request-agent . Automatically triggers emergency maintenance notifications and creates maintenance orders in an enterprise ERP system when equipment thresholds are met. Ensures zero delay in emergency processing by instantly creating and routing work orders. 

serv-dispatcher-agent . Provides intelligent dispatch by assigning the right technician to speed up resolution of maintenance and service issues. Considers technician skills, location, availability, and task urgency to optimize assignment and minimize response time. 46 technician-agent-mobile . Provides a mobile-ready technician briefing that unifies all relevant data to enable fast, confident on-site fixes. Consolidates equipment history, similar past repairs, spare parts availability, and safety information into a single actionable briefing. 

Product Design & Engineering recipe-formulation-agent . The Recipe Formulation Agent finds, reuses, and adapts existing recipes and in-gredients based on structured specification data – reducing redundant creation and accelerating formulation cycles. 

Manufacturing Operations Manager shop-floor-supervisor-agent . This agent helps production supervisors adjust schedules and reallocate orders to address the potential disruptions on the shop floor, ensuring a seamless and efficient flow of goods. Production supervisors can achieve overall operational efficiency, minimizing downtime by allowing the shop floor to adapt quickly to changes and maintain optimal productivity. 

Procurement Operations Specialist supplier-discovery-agent . Identifies best-fit suppliers and engagement paths to increase margins and resilience. 

supplier-onboarding-agent . Guides supplier onboarding for a procurement network by helping users upload vendor data, plan onboarding waves, match suppliers already present in the network, send invitations, and monitor post-invitation exceptions that require buyer input. 

Unspecified department 

Unspecified persona create-ppt . Create PPT 

create-word-doc . Create Word Doc 

web-search . Web Search 47