Title: Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.20510v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 01:21:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents 

Alaia Solko-Breslin 1,3,* , Pramod Kaushik Mudrakarta 1, Mihai Christodorescu 2, Somesh Jha 2,4 and Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham 1   

> 1Google DeepMind, 2Google, 3University of Pennsylvania, 4University of Wisconsin–Madison

Securing AI agents that operate in complex digital environments has become a critical need, and runtime monitoring approaches that formulate and enforce policies expressed in a formal language like Datalog offer a promising solution. However, existing approaches are restricted to deterministic policies. In many practical applications of AI agents, there is a need to enforce security policies in the face of ambiguity, leading to probabilistic predicates or state transitions (for example, a declassifier or Personally Identifiable Information (PII) detector that has some failure probability on each invocation). Furthermore, in many such applications, one cannot easily make the independence assumptions necessary to invoke prior work on probabilistic inference in Datalog. We address this by introducing a sound and efficient framework for such verification based on distributionally robust optimization, computing sound upper bounds on the probability of policy violation regardless of possible correlations between predicates. On standard benchmarks for terminal and tool calling agents, we demonstrate that our approach outperforms prior art and improves the security-utility trade-off while ensuring rigorous bounds on the probability of policy violation. 

## 1. Introduction 

The emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) has enabled a new computing paradigm centered on AI agents that execute complex, multi-step tasks by acting directly within system environments (Park et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023). To fulfill user requests, these agents are given programmatic access to system interfaces, including terminals, file systems, and external network APIs. Despite its utility, this architecture introduces critical security and privacy risks by granting agents the ability to autonomously read, modify, and transmit data across system boundaries. Consider how an agent that assists an enterprise employee with emailing contracts to a third-party vendor might accidentally share confidential data from the employee’s filesystem that the vendor is not authorized to receive. Agents are susceptible to such security failures even in completely trusted environments due to execution or reasoning errors, but the threat compounds dramatically in untrusted settings, where adversarial tactics like prompt-injection attacks can override the agent’s logic to fundamentally alter its planned trajectory (Debenedetti et al., 2024; Zhan et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025). Recent discoveries of successful real-world exploits validate these threats (Bourtoule, 2026; Team et al., 2026), demonstrating that without guardrails, attackers can systematically hijack agent toolchains to silently exfiltrate sensitive user data. These risks motivate the development of runtime defenses to enforce policy compliance during agent execution. To provide formal enforcement guarantees, recent frameworks adapt the classical reference monitor paradigm to intercept proposed tool calls before execution (Chen et al., 2025c; Palumbo et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2026). These monitors evaluate specific environmental predicates to make a decision to allow or block the action, e.g., only allowing a data-sharing action if it is determined that the target file does not contain sensitive data. However, in practical settings, an agent’s environment is inherently ambiguous, for example from the imperfect accuracy of upstream  

> Corresponding author(s): alaia@engineering.upenn.edu & dvij@google.com *Work done as a Student Researcher at Google DeepMind.
> ©2026 Google. All rights reserved
> arXiv:2606.20510v1 [cs.CR] 18 Jun 2026 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

classifiers and redaction tools. This persistent uncertainty necessitates a paradigm shift toward probabilistic verification, where policy compliance must be formally evaluated over probabilistic predicates. A straightforward way to integrate probabilistic predicates into deterministic monitors would be to apply a threshold on the probability (say, the probability that a document contains PII). However, this discretization introduces a fragile trade-off between security and utility. For predicates representing the probability that an object is sensitive, high thresholds risk under-blocking harmful actions, and low thresholds risk over-blocking safe actions. Ultimately, forcing continuous probabilities into binary choices prematurely discards the exact context needed to guide enforcement decisions, leaving deterministic monitors incapable of handling real-world ambiguity; probabilistic verification must therefore preserve this context. To properly balance security and utility, the monitor should evaluate the current trajectory (i.e., its history of actions and data accesses) to compute a conservative upper bound on the global probability of the agent entering an unsafe state. This computed upper bound is then compared against a global safety threshold that dictates whether the monitor blocks or allows the proposed action. We formalize the computation of this global risk bound as probabilistic inference over an execution trajectory, where each tool invoked by the agent implements a specific state propagation contract. These propagation rules can be either deterministic, such as copying a file to a new destination, or stochastic, such as noisy data declassification. The initial facts fed into these rules are parameterized by lower and upper marginal probability bounds, e.g., from a PII detector. To track these dependencies across a multi-step trajectory, we express the state transitions as a Datalog program and compile the execution trace into a derivation graph supporting logical conjunction, disjunction, and inversion. To evaluate execution risk, we model the Datalog derivation graph as an exact optimization problem over joint probability measures. Specifically, we formulate an exponentially-sized linear program (LP) that enforces the marginal probabilities and state transition rules. Importantly, this formulation makes no assumptions about the underlying joint distribution, remaining distributionally robust whether the input facts are statistically correlated or independent, unless such information is explicitly available as part of the model of the environment that the agent operates in. This stands in direct contrast to standard probabilistic techniques like Monte Carlo sampling or Weighted Model Counting, which assume mutual independence and can severely underestimate risk during tool chaining. Because optimizing over the full state space of the exact LP is computationally intractable for real-time monitoring, we introduce a polynomially-sized semidefinite programming (SDP) relaxation. Based on distributionally robust optimization (DRO) (Wiesemann et al., 2014), this formulation tracks only second-order moments of the state distribution, yielding a sound over-approximation of the true worst-case probability of violation. This ensures that security is preserved, at the risk of a reduction in utility (which we empirically measure in our evaluation). We evaluate our framework on terminal agent benchmarks, including Intercode-NL2Bash (Yang et al., 2023) and ATBench (Liu et al., 2026). For these environments, we formalize taint transition semantics across tool calls to bound the worst-case probability of sensitive files being leaked during data-sharing actions. To evaluate our SDP relaxation on other security policies, we also consider tasks from the Praline benchmarks (Wang et al., 2025), including a side-channel vulnerability analysis. Our results demonstrate that our approach outperforms prior art in terms of the security-utility tradeoff. In summary, our key contributions are as follows: 1. We identify security risks in deterministic verification engines in ambiguous agent environments and introduce a model for probabilistic verification. 2. We model multi-step agent trajectories via Datalog derivation graphs and formalize the compu-

> 2Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

Figure 1 | Overview of the deterministic and probabilistic verification paradigms for agents (based on the policy from Listing 1). Binary evaluation (e.g., FORGE (Palumbo et al., 2026)) requires applying local thresholds to probabilistic facts, leading to a loss of information. Despite both messages indirectly referring to XYZ Corp, their predicates are classified as False, resulting in the decision to authorize the tool (false negative). Conversely, probabilistic verification determines that the cumulative probability of the messages mentioning XYZ Corp is high enough to warrant denial (true positive). tation of worst-case policy violation risk as an exact LP. 3. We introduce a polynomially-sized SDP relaxation that tracks second-order moments to efficiently approximate risk at runtime, and we formally prove its soundness as a strict upper bound on execution risk. 4. We evaluate our framework across terminal agent benchmarks, demonstrating that our relaxation effectively balances the security-utility tradeoff with low computational overhead. 

## 2. Background and Motivation 

2.1. Runtime Execution Monitoring for Agents 

Runtime execution monitoring uses a stateful reference monitor (Anderson, 1972) to enforce policies over an agent’s execution trajectory by mediating tool access. The monitor acts as an inline interposi-tion layer, intercepting candidate tool invocations before they execute or update the environment state. Formally, we model the policy-relevant environmental context as a state 𝑠 ∈ S , initialized to a base configuration 𝑠 0. An execution trajectory is a sequence of tool calls 𝑡 1, 𝑡 2, . . . , 𝑡 𝑇 , where each 𝑡 𝑘 ∈ T 

specifies a tool identifier and its runtime arguments. The environmental effects of these interactions are governed by a state transition function:  

> Δ

: S × T → S 

which maps the current system state and a candidate tool call to a successor state. Execution boundaries are specified via a policy predicate Π : S → { Allow , Block }, which determines whether a given state configuration is compliant. The reference monitor enforces safety via an intercept-evaluate-commit cycle at each step 𝑘 .When the agent issues a candidate tool call 𝑡 𝑘 from state 𝑠 𝑘 , the monitor suspends execution and speculatively projects the next system state: 𝑠 ′ 

> 𝑘 +1

= Δ(𝑠 𝑘 , 𝑡 𝑘 ). If Π(𝑠 ′

> 𝑘 +1

) = Block , the monitor blocks the tool invocation, discards the speculative update ( 𝑠 𝑘 +1 ← 𝑠 𝑘 ), and returns structured feedback to the agent to trigger autonomous error recovery. Otherwise, the tool is executed and the state transition is committed ( 𝑠 𝑘 +1 ← 𝑠 ′

> 𝑘 +1

). 

> 3Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

2.2. Probabilistic Execution Monitoring 

While deterministic reference monitors provide strong structural guarantees for discrete inputs, their enforcement capabilities degrade when policies rely on noisy or ambiguous predicates (say, the output of a learned classifier or LLM-based judge). Traditional monitors can handle this ambiguity by applying local thresholds to convert probabilistic outputs into binary values. However, this early binarization creates an information bottleneck, discarding marginal uncertainties that compound over multi-step trajectories into global policy violations. To illustrate this vulnerability, consider a security policy from FORGE (Palumbo et al., 2026) designed to prevent unauthorized data exfiltration. The policy blocks an agent’s call to an external API if its contents depend on a user message that contains sensitive proprietary information: Listing 1 | Privacy policy for protecting sensitive proprietary information. 

Unauthorized (a) :-Actions (a) , is_tool_call (a) , Current ( id ) , Depends (id , id2 ) , SentMessage ( id2 , msg ) , msg . agent_role == User , llm_check (" Message references XYZ Corp " , msg . contents ). 

Because the variable id2 can bind to any past message within the context window, this single rule can be expanded into a logical disjunction evaluating risk across the entire multi-turn conversation history. When a reference monitor relies on local thresholding, it forces a hard decision on each past message branch independently before evaluating the global policy. As illustrated in Figure 1, we consider an execution trace containing two consecutive user messages: 𝑚 1 (“Here are the unreleased Q4 revenue numbers for Project Horizon: $14M in enterprise software licenses, ...”) and 𝑚 2 (“Can you use these numbers to draft an optimistic press release for our upcoming investor call?”). Due to the ambiguity of internal project codenames and what is meant by the “upcoming investor call,” a classifier might return a marginal risk probability of 0.45 for 𝑚 1 and 0.25 for 𝑚 2. If the agent decides to call an external API to summarize the Q4 figures for the press release, this prompt definitively depends on 𝑚 1 and 𝑚 2, so the security question becomes: does either message reference XYZ Corp? If the reference monitor applies a local threshold of 0.50 to each predicate, a deterministic engine would evaluate both predicates to False , underestimating the collective threat and allowing the unsafe execution. Conversely, probabilistic verification preserves continuous weights and computes the joint proba-bility of the entire query over the execution trace. Therefore, if the reference monitor computes the cumulative probability of these predicates and applies a global threshold (e.g., 0.50 ) to the final risk probability, it would correctly evaluate the policy as Unauthorized and block the unsafe execution. Computing exact joint distributions over complex trajectories is often computationally intractable at runtime, but efficient over-approximation of the risk probability still preserves the system’s structural safety guarantees. Let R ( 𝑎 ) ∈ [ 0, 1] represent the exact risk probability that an action 𝑎 violates the policy based on the underlying predicates, and let 𝜏 be the global safety threshold. If the reference monitor applies a sound upper-bound estimate R′ (𝑎 ) ≥ R ( 𝑎 ), the engine maintains a predictable operational bound: 

R′ (𝑎 ) ≤ 𝜏 =⇒ R ( 𝑎 ) ≤ 𝜏 

> 4Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

Consequently, the approximation introduces no structural false negatives relative to an exact evaluation. While noisy base classifiers can still propagate errors, the monitor itself adds no additional vulnerability. Choosing an estimator thus requires balancing this safety guarantee with system utility, keeping the upper bound tight enough to avoid over-blocking that disrupts valid workflows. 

2.3. Threat Model 

We use the standard threat model of a security reference monitor (Anderson, 1972), in which the attacker has direct or indirect access to an AI agent and can influence the instructions and data that the agent receives. Note that this model allows for indirect prompt-injection attacks as well for the user to be malicious, both of which can result in the agent taking undesirable actions. The actions that the agent takes are in the form of tool calls, where each tool call is verified by a reference monitor for compliance with a security policy before the tool executes. The attacker cannot bypass or disable the reference monitor, nor can it modify the security policy, but has knowledge of the available tools, the security policy, and the tool failure rates. We however need to assume that the attacker cannot invalidate the probabilistic assumptions we make on tool failures (see the “Tool threat model” discussion in subsection 3.1). 

2.4. Related Work Agent guardrails and defenses. Early defenses for agents rely on targeted prompting and align-ment tuning to encourage policy compliance and prompt-injection resistance (Chen et al., 2025a,b; Ghalebikesabi et al., 2024; Schick et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024). To enforce stronger boundaries, structural defenses isolate untrusted inputs from the agent’s planning layer entirely (Debenedetti et al., 2026; Li et al., 2026), while external guardrail toolkits use standalone classification models to filter queries and tool responses (Inan et al., 2023; Rebedea et al., 2023). To avoid the latency overhead of these always-on filters, CausalArmor (Kim et al., 2026) uses ablation-based attribution to detect when an untrusted input overrides the user’s original intent, triggering targeted sanitization and retroactive thought-masking only when a threat is present. While these strategies have been empirically shown to mitigate common attack vectors, they operate heuristically and lack the formal enforcement mechanisms needed to guarantee policy compliance across agent trajectories. 

Formal policy enforcement. Several frameworks adapt classic reference monitors (Anderson, 1972; Crampton, 2005) to deterministically enforce safety policies over an agent’s execution trajectory, aligning with foundational models of execution monitoring (Schneider, 2000). These approaches compile formal specifications, such as temporal logic, regular languages, or behavioral contracts, into runtime guards that intercept untrusted actions before execution (Chen et al., 2025c; Kamath et al., 2025; Li et al., 2024; Miculicich et al., 2025; Palumbo et al., 2026; Tsai and Bagdasarian, 2025; Wang et al., 2026). A parallel line of work focuses on dynamic authorization, enforcing the principle of least privilege by restricting tool-calling capabilities as the execution context evolves (Shi et al., 2026; Zhu et al., 2025). While these deterministic techniques provide rigorous guardrails, they are incompatible with noisy, probabilistic predicates unless ad-hoc thresholds are applied. Our framework addresses this limitation by extending provable enforcement to uncertain environments via distributionally robust risk estimation. 

Information flow control for agents. Privacy policies for autonomous agents frequently restrict what untrusted content can be read, processed, or shared with external recipients. This connects to classic Information Flow Control (IFC) literature, which uses security lattices and non-interference properties to ensure that secret data cannot influence public outputs (Denning, 1976; Myers and Liskov, 1997; Sabelfeld and Myers, 2003). Recent frameworks apply these traditional IFC properties 

> 5Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

directly to agent runtimes to prevent data exfiltration. For instance, system-level defenses disaggregate the architecture into context-aware pipelines to filter untrusted planning inputs (Wu et al., 2024), while language model planners leverage dynamic taint-tracking to enforce confidentiality and integrity labels across agent states (Costa et al., 2025). While these techniques provide formal guarantees for agentic information flow control, they still rely on discrete security labels. Our approach instead tracks the propagation of continuous sensitivity probabilities, drawing conceptual parallels to Quantitative Information Flow (QIF) frameworks (Denning, 1982; Gray, 1991). The goal of QIF is to measure the amount of information leaked about a secret by observing the running of a program. In this paper, the uncertainty arises from the use of non-deterministic components (e.g., using an LLM-based classifier), so the sources of uncertainty in our model are different from QIF. 

Probabilistic logic programming. Probabilistic logic programming frameworks for Prolog (De Raedt et al., 2007; Fierens et al., 2015; Manhaeve et al., 2018) and Datalog (BáRány et al., 2017; Li et al., 2023; Tsamoura et al., 2020), alongside frameworks for weighted model counting over probabilistic programs (Holtzen et al., 2020; Sang et al., 2005), reason under uncertainty by combining formal logic with probabilistic predicates. However, these frameworks assume that all base facts are indepen-dent, an assumption that fails to hold in agentic settings where environment states and tool outputs are inherently coupled. While linear programming frameworks can exactly optimize over measures to handle these arbitrary dependencies (Andersen and Hooker, 1996), the required optimization scales exponentially with the number of states modeled. Even when specialized relational frameworks like JudgeD (Wanders et al., 2016) and Praline (Wang et al., 2025) compute this optimum within a small error bound, the underlying solver overhead is too inefficient for real-time verification over complex execution traces. 

## 3. Probabilistic Verification as an Optimization Problem 

To rigorously bound the probability that an agent’s trajectory violates a given policy, we formulate verification as a distributionally robust optimization problem. This framework requires two core components: a set of sound marginal probability bounds on the initial environmental facts, and a formal transition logic that propagates these facts across an execution trace. In this section, we first detail how a security engineer derives these initial base bounds from empirical tools and calibrated classifiers. We then formalize these inputs within a robust Probabilistic Datalog framework and construct the exact optimization problem over the resulting execution state measures. 

3.1. Probabilistic Models of Tools 

We describe in this section how one might develop probabilistic models of certain tools in the environment that would then be used to compute the final certificate. 

Deterministic tool failure rates. To bound the failure probability of a tool (say, an LLM-based or deterministic redaction tool, or an LLM-based PII detector), the security engineer profiles the tool on a representative evaluation dataset with known ground-truth labels. Specifically, if the tool exhibits 𝑘 

failures across 𝑁 independent evaluation trials, the empirical failure rate is ˆ𝑝 = 𝑘 𝑁 . The engineer can establish a sound upper bound 𝑢 redact_fail using a 1 − 𝛼 Clopper-Pearson confidence interval:  

> 𝑢 redact_fail

= 𝐹 −1 

> 𝛽

(1 − 𝛼 ; 𝑘 + 1, 𝑁 − 𝑘 )

where 𝐹 −1 

> 𝛽

represents the inverse cumulative distribution function of a Beta distribution. 

Correlations across multiple invocations. The above assumptions are made marginally, per tool invocation, but do not make any explicit assumptions about correlations between tool or classifier 

> 6Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

failure rates across multiple invocations in a single agent run (e.g., multiple calls to a PII detector tool). However, in the presence of further information, we can assume for example that the tool errors are positively correlated across multiple runs, or that failure rates for two complementary tools are negatively correlated. Following prior work (Wang et al., 2025), we model these as three possible correlation classes: POS (positively correlated), NEG (negatively correlated) and IND (statistically independent). 

Tool threat model. We assume that the above probabilistic models of tools are robust in the face of attackers, in other words, tool failures occur independently of attacker actions. This can be justified in one of two ways: 1. Tools with probabilistic models execute in sanitized environments: A tool failure occurs because of an exogenous event or that the inputs to calibrated classifiers only come from trusted sources that an attacker cannot influence. 2. Tools have intrinsic robustness: For example, a text classifier that has been trained to be robust to specific perturbations that an attacker can make. Further validation of this threat model remains out of scope for this paper; we take this assumption as a given in the rest of this paper. 

3.2. Probabilistic Inference in Datalog 

Probabilistic inference in Datalog begins with a program D = (F , R) , where F is a finite set of ground base facts and R is a set of ground intensional rules used to derive additional facts. Unlike classical settings, we do not assume that the base facts 𝑓 ∈ F represent independent random variables. Instead, the true joint distribution over the facts is governed by an unknown probability measure 𝜇 . This acknowledges that in agent environments, base facts can be positively correlated, but their exact correlation structures are unknown to the verifier. For example, a PII classifier might fail to detect the same piece of sensitive data common to multiple files; similarly, a redaction tool might fail to redact the same sensitive data across these files. We assume that each base fact 𝑓 ∈ F is associated with known or estimated marginal probability bounds [ℓ𝑓 , 𝑢 𝑓 ] ⊆ [ 0, 1]. For any specific realization of base facts 𝐿 ⊆ F , also referred to as a “world,” the complete deterministic program is evaluated as 𝐿 ∪R . Because ground Datalog programs guarantee a unique least fixed point, the semantics of the program are uniquely defined by its minimal model, denoted M ( 𝐿 ∪ R) . Let BD denote the Herbrand base of the program, encompassing all ground base and derived facts. The goal of distributionally robust probabilistic inference is to bound the success probability 𝑃 (𝑞 ) of a safety query 𝑞 ∈ B D over the set of all valid joint measures 𝜇 that respect these marginal constraints: 

> 𝑃

(𝑞 ) =∑︁ 

> 𝐿 ⊆ F
> 𝜇

(𝐿 )𝕀 [𝑞 ∈ M ( 𝐿 ∪ R)] 

Because Datalog rules are monotone, the query 𝑞 can be represented as a symbolic lineage formula over the Boolean random variables 𝑥 𝑓 associated with each base fact 𝑓 ∈ F . This formula forms a monotone Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF) over the base facts that derive 𝑞 : 

> 𝑞

≡

Ü 

> 𝑑 ∈Derv (𝑞 )

Û   

> 𝑓 ∈facts (𝑑 )
> 𝑥 𝑓

where Derv (𝑞 ) represents the operational derivations of 𝑞 under R, and facts (𝑑 ) ⊆ F .

The risk of independence semantics. In contrast to our distribution-free model, most existing frameworks for probabilistic inference in Datalog closely follow the ProbLog model (De Raedt et al., 2007), assuming that the base facts are mutually independent. Formally, for any base fact 𝑓 ∈ F and any subset of remaining facts 𝑆 ⊆ F \ { 𝑓 }, the conditional probability satisfies: 

> 𝑃

(𝑥 𝑓 | x𝑆 ) = 𝑃 (𝑥 𝑓 )

> 7Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

where x𝑆 denotes the joint assignment of the variables in 𝑆 . Under this assumption, the probability of sampling any single subprogram 𝐿 collapses to a simple product of marginal probabilities: 

> 𝑃

(𝐿 | D) =

Ö  

> 𝑓 ∈𝐿
> 𝑝 𝑓

Ö 

> 𝑓 ∈ F\ 𝐿

(1 − 𝑝 𝑓 )

where 𝑃 (𝑥 𝑓 ) = 𝑝 𝑓 . Evaluating 𝑃 (𝑞 | D) exactly under this model is equivalent to Weighted Model Counting (WMC), which is known to be #P-hard (Sang et al., 2005). More importantly, the independence assumption is fundamentally unsafe for policy verification. For example, if an agent applies the same redaction tool (with failure probability 𝑝 ) twice to the same file, WMC assumes independence and computes the joint failure probability as 𝑃 (𝑥 𝑓 1 ∧ 𝑥 𝑓 2 ) = 𝑝 2.In reality, these steps are perfectly correlated: if the tool misses a piece of PII on the first run, it will also fail on the second, so the true risk remains 𝑝 . Distributionally robust verification avoids this risk by making no assumptions about these joint correlations. 

3.3. Compiling Datalog Trajectories to a DAG 

To evaluate policy compliance over an agent’s runtime behavior, we translate its execution trace into a concrete Datalog program D, where R operationalizes the policy’s state transition logic and 

F captures the ground observations. This translation manifests as a directed acyclic (derivation) graph (DAG) 𝐺 = (𝑉 𝐹 ∪ 𝑉 𝑅 , 𝐸 ), where the rule nodes 𝑉 𝑅 represent the instantiated rules R, and the fact nodes 𝑉 𝐹 encompass both the initial base facts F and all subsequent derived facts. The edges 𝐸 

connect parent facts to child facts via their corresponding rule nodes. This graph structure allows us to decompose the global lineage of a given query into a localized system of algebraic constraints. Consider an agent tasked by an employee at an enterprise with declassifying a.txt , combining it with b.txt , copying the result to res.txt , and sending the outcome to alex@external.com , a third-party vendor. A set of commands the agent might execute to accomplish this task is as follows: 

redact a. txt > i1 . txt cat b. txt i1 . txt > i2 . txt cp i2 . txt res . txt send_file res . txt alex@external . com 

The security objective is to determine whether sensitive information could get leaked to the third-party vendor. Given the above trace, this reduces to checking whether res.txt contains sensitive data. The compilation begins by establishing the base facts 𝑓 ∈ F , which represent the source nodes in the graph (having no parent facts). We initialize the graph with prior marginal probabilities for these base facts. For example, we might run a PII classifier on a.txt and b.txt , producing probabilities for the facts sensitive(a) and sensitive(b) . We also start with the probability that redact fails to remove sensitive data, taken from historical failure rates of the redaction tool. Following standard convention, we prefix each fact 𝑓 with its marginal probability 𝑝 𝑓 using the notation 𝑝 𝑓 :: 𝑓 :

0.9:: sensitive (a). 0.2:: sensitive (b). 0.1:: redact_fail . 

These atomic declarations instantiate the initial set of fact nodes 𝑉 𝐹 . As the agent executes commands sequentially, each step appends individual rules 𝑟 to the set of intensional rules R, thereby deriving fact nodes whose truth values depend on upstream predicates. Note that these rules are predefined by a formal policy which assigns information-flow semantics to each available tool (Table 1). We now 

> 8Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

Table 1 | Taint semantics for each transition type. Each bash command is assigned one of these transition types. 

Transition Semantics 

Propagate 𝑥 𝑣 = 𝑥 𝑢 

Merge 𝑥 𝑣 = 𝑥 𝑢 1 ∨ 𝑥 𝑢 2

Declassify 𝑥 𝑣 = 𝑥 𝑢 ∧ 𝑥 redact_fail 

CreateClean 𝑥 𝑣 = false 

CreateTainted 𝑥 𝑣 = true describe how each operation in this trajectory maps to transition rules which guide the construction of the DAG. 

Data declassification. The agent’s first command attempts to strip sensitive information from 

> a.txt

. The semantics of this transformation are captured by a Declassify transition rule: 

sensitive ( i1 ) :- sensitive (a) , redact_fail . 

This rule establishes a conjunctive rule node 𝑟 1 ∈ 𝑉 𝑅 . The derived fact node 𝑣 𝑖 1 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 becomes a child of 

𝑟 1, which in turn draws its incoming edges from its structural predecessors pre (𝑟 1) = {𝑣 𝑎 , 𝑣 redact_fail }.The intermediate file i1.txt is deemed sensitive if the source file was originally sensitive and the redaction failed to remove all sensitive data. 

Data merging. Next, the agent combines the contents of b.txt and the redacted intermediate file, representing a Merge transition: 

sensitive ( i2 ) :- sensitive ( i1 ). sensitive ( i2 ) :- sensitive (b). 

In contrast to the previous step, this operation introduces a logical disjunction. It instantiates two distinct rule nodes 𝑟 2, 𝑟 3 ∈ 𝑉 𝑅 that both point to the same derived fact node 𝑣 𝑖 2 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 . Consequently,  

> i2.txt

inherits sensitivity if either upstream file is sensitive. 

Data propagation. In the last step before send_file , the agent copies the merged contents to the final outbound file target, representing a Propagate transition: 

sensitive ( res ) :- sensitive ( i2 ). 

This rule simply asserts that 𝑣 𝑟𝑒𝑠 is sensitive if its immediate predecessor 𝑣 𝑖 2 is sensitive. 

Querying the outbound file. The trajectory terminates with an external data transmission. Because this action crosses a trust boundary, the security policy marks the target attribute as a terminal query node 𝑞 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 :

query ( sensitive ( res )). 

This step-by-step compilation yields a complete derivation graph 𝐺 (Figure 2) which preserves the exact sensitivity provenance chain resulting from the agent’s actions. Through this derivation graph, we embed the Boolean logic into the real space ℝ|𝑉 𝐹 | , mapping each logical gate to its equivalent multilinear polynomial constraint over {0, 1}|𝑉 𝐹 | . Conjunctions map to multiplication (𝑥 1 𝑥 2), disjunctions (𝑥 1 ∨ 𝑥 2) map to inclusion-exclusion (𝑥 1 + 𝑥 2 − 𝑥 1 𝑥 2), and negations (¬ 𝑥 1) map to inversion (1 − 𝑥 1).   

> 9Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents
> sensitive(a) redact_fail sensitive(b)
> 𝑟 1
> sensitive(i1)
> 𝑟 2𝑟 3
> sensitive(i2)
> 𝑟 4
> sensitive(res)

Figure 2 | Compiled derivation graph for deriving the sensitivity of res . Fact nodes are boxed, and the query node is double-boxed. Rule nodes used to derive new fact nodes are circled. Applying this mapping to our example yields the following Boolean constraints for each derived fact: 

𝑥 𝑖 1 = 𝑥 𝑎 𝑥 redact_fail 

𝑥 𝑖 2 = 𝑥 𝑖 1 + 𝑥 𝑏 − 𝑥 𝑖 1 𝑥 𝑏 

𝑥 res = 𝑥 𝑖 2

Rather than collapsing this chain into a single algebraic derivation, we preserve these intermediate variables to ensure compatibility with a lower-order relaxation. Formally, for any derived fact 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 , its logical parent set P ( 𝑣 ) ⊆ 𝑉 𝐹 comprises the fact nodes that feed into 𝑣 ’s immediate rules. Consequently, the Boolean transition for any derived fact 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 is expressed as a multilinear polynomial over its immediate parent facts: 

𝑥 𝑣 = 𝜙 𝑣 (𝑥 P ( 𝑣 ) ).

Theorem 1. For any security policy written in Datalog, its execution on any finite trace of events can be rewritten as a derivation graph where |P ( 𝑣 )| ≤ 2 for all 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 .Proof. This can be shown by induction on the number of immediate parent nodes 𝑛 = |P ( 𝑣 )| of a derived fact 𝑣 . In the base case ( 𝑛 ≤ 2) the condition holds trivially. In the inductive case, we assume that any fact with 𝑛 immediate parents can be rewritten into a derivation graph with maximum arity 2. In the case of multi-rule disjunction, if the node 𝑣 is derived by 𝑛 + 1 distinct rules, we can isolate the first 𝑛 rules into an auxiliary node 𝑥 aux , yielding the binary relation 𝑥 𝑣 = 𝑥 aux ∨ 𝑥 𝑢 𝑛 +1 . In the case of multi-literal conjunction, if the node 𝑣 is derived by a Horn clause rule with 𝑛 + 1 body literals, we can isolate the first 𝑛 literals into an auxiliary node 𝑥 aux , yielding the binary relation 𝑥 𝑣 = 𝑥 aux ∧ 𝑥 𝑢 𝑛 +1 .Both cases follow from the associativity of ∨ and ∧. □

3.4. Exact Optimization over State Measures 

After compiling the trajectory, we are left with a DAG where each node represents a state variable. Let the collection of these variables be denoted 𝑥 = (𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 |𝑉 𝐹 | ) ∈ { 0, 1}|𝑉 𝐹 | . Recall from subsection 3.2 

> 10 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

that 𝜇 denotes the joint probability measure over the base facts. Because all derived variables are deterministic functions of these base facts, 𝜇 uniquely extends to a joint distribution over the full state vector 𝑥 ∈ { 0, 1}|𝑉 𝐹 | Additionally, there is a set of unsafe states U ⊆ { 0, 1}|𝑉 𝐹 | , e.g., states in which a set of outbound files are considered sensitive. In this paper, we will assume that U has the form {𝑥 : 𝑥 𝑡 = 1}

The probability of an unsafe execution under a given joint distribution 𝜇 is the measure of this unsafe set: 

𝑅 (𝜇 ) =∑︁  

> 𝑥 ∈ U

𝜇 (𝑥 ) =∑︁  

> 𝑥 :𝑥 𝑡 =1

𝜇 (𝑥 ).

To bound this risk rigorously, we define 𝑅 ∗ as the maximum probability of entering an unsafe state. We compute this bound by seeking a joint probability measure 𝜇 on {0, 1}|𝑉 𝐹 | that is consistent with all state transitions implied by the execution graph and initial conditions, but which maximizes the risk of unsafe execution. Known initial conditions on atomic variables 𝑥 𝑣 (where P ( 𝑣 ) = ∅) are bounded above and below by marginal probabilities 𝑢 𝑣 and ℓ𝑣 , respectively. We formulate an exact optimization problem over measures 𝜇 as follows: 

𝑅 ∗ = max 

> 𝜇

∑︁ 𝑥 ∈ U 

𝜇 (𝑥 )

s.t. ∑︁ 

> 𝑥

𝜇 (𝑥 )𝕀 [𝑥 𝑣 = 𝜙 𝑣 (𝑥 P ( 𝑣 ) )] = 1

∀𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 : P ( 𝑣 ) ≠ ∅

ℓ𝑣 ≤∑︁ 

> 𝑥

𝜇 (𝑥 )𝕀 [𝑥 𝑣 = 1] ≤ 𝑢 𝑣 

∀𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 : P ( 𝑣 ) = ∅

𝜇 (𝑥 ) ≥ 0 ∀𝑥 ∈ { 0, 1}|𝑉 𝐹 |∑︁   

> 𝑥 ∈ { 0,1}|𝑉 𝐹 |

𝜇 (𝑥 ) = 1

(1) The first constraint restricts the support of the measure 𝜇 to states that strictly satisfy the deterministic transition logic, forcing the probability of impossible states to zero. The second constraint enforces the lower and upper marginal bounds on the initial base facts based on our prior observations. Finally, the remaining constraints guarantee that 𝜇 constitutes a valid probability distribution by ensuring non-negativity and total mass normalization. 

3.5. Exact Optimization Example 

We illustrate the construction of the exact optimization problem using our running example from subsection 3.3. The state vector is defined over our six fact variables: 𝑥 = (𝑥 𝑎 , 𝑥 𝑏 , 𝑥 redact_fail , 𝑥 𝑖 1, 𝑥 𝑖 2, 𝑥 𝑡 )

(note that we relabel 𝑥 res to 𝑥 𝑡 to have a consistent notation for the unsafe set). The unsafe set U

corresponds to any state configuration where the outbound file is sensitive, meaning U = {𝑥 | 𝑥 𝑡 = 1}.For the sake of simplicity, we assume that our marginal prior probabilities are tight point probabilities in this example, setting ℓ𝑣 = 𝑢 𝑣 = 𝑝 𝑣 for all base facts 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 (where P ( 𝑣 ) = ∅). Substituting these marginals and our local multilinear polynomials into Equation 1 yields the following program: 

𝑅 ∗ = max 

> 𝜇

∑︁ 𝑥 :𝑥 𝑡 =1

𝜇 (𝑥 )

s.t. 𝜇 (𝑥 ) = 0 ∀𝑥 where 𝑥 𝑖 1 ≠ 𝑥 𝑎 𝑥 redact_fail 

𝜇 (𝑥 ) = 0 ∀𝑥 where 𝑥 𝑖 2 ≠ 𝑥 𝑖 1 + 𝑥 𝑏 − 𝑥 𝑖 1 𝑥 𝑏 

> 11 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

𝜇 (𝑥 ) = 0 ∀𝑥 where 𝑥 𝑡 ≠ 𝑥 𝑖 2∑︁ 

> 𝑥

𝜇 (𝑥 )𝑥 𝑎 = 0.9,∑︁ 

> 𝑥

𝜇 (𝑥 )𝑥 𝑏 = 0.2,∑︁ 

> 𝑥

𝜇 (𝑥 )𝑥 redact_fail = 0.1∑︁ 

> 𝑥

𝜇 (𝑥 ) = 1, 𝜇 (𝑥 ) ≥ 0 ∀𝑥. 

Solving this program yields a maximum leakage probability of 𝑅 ∗ = 0.300 (30 .0% ). This upper bound can be understood analytically via Fréchet bounds. For the rule 𝑥 𝑖 1 = 𝑥 𝑎 ∧ 𝑥 redact_fail , the maximum probability of the intersection is 

min (𝑃 (𝑥 𝑎 ), 𝑃 (𝑥 redact_fail )) = min (0.9, 0.1) = 0.1,

achieved when the two facts are perfectly positively correlated, e.g., the redaction tool always fails to remove some type of PII contained in a.txt . For the disjunction 𝑥 𝑖 2 = 𝑥 𝑖 1 ∨ 𝑥 𝑏 , the optimizer maximizes the total probability by making 𝑥 𝑖 1 and 𝑥 𝑏 mutually exclusive, which eliminates the overlapping penalty term and yields 0.1 + 0.2 = 0.3.In contrast, standard probabilistic inference for Datalog evaluates this query using Weighted Model Counting (WMC) as outlined in subsection 3.2. WMC operates under the rigid assumption that all base facts are strictly independent, fixing the joint distribution to a product of marginal probabilities. Evaluating the global lineage formula, 𝑥 𝑡 ≡ ( 𝑥 𝑎 ∧ 𝑥 redact_fail ) ∨ 𝑥 𝑏 , under independence corresponds to the following step-by-step calculation: 

𝑃 (𝑥 𝑖 1 = 1) = 0.9 × 0.1 = 0.09 

𝑃 (𝑥 𝑡 = 1) = 0.09 + 0.2 − ( 0.09 × 0.2) = 0.272 

Thus, WMC computes a leakage probability of 27.2%, leaving a 2.8% risk deficit. This deficit has severe implications for threshold-based policy enforcement. If an enterprise sets a global safety threshold to block data-sharing actions with a ≥ 30% leakage probability, the robust optimization approach blocks the action, whereas a reference monitor using WMC incorrectly permits it. Because empirical marginals are often imperfectly calibrated, distributionally-robust optimization ensures soundness by bounding this worst-case risk. This divergence compounds significantly as agents operate over more files and tool calls. In larger derivation graphs, WMC can severely misestimate the true risk depending on the logical structure. For instance, in a long chain of conjunctions ( 𝑥 1 ∧ · · · ∧ 𝑥 𝑛 ) where the underlying events are actually perfectly correlated, the true risk remains high and is bounded only by the minimum marginal probability. However, WMC simply multiplies these variables, causing its risk estimate to approach zero and leaving a potentially massive vulnerability undetected. 

## 4. Relaxation of State Measures Optimization 

4.1. Semidefinite Programming Formulation 

The exact formulation presented in subsection 3.4 is an exponentially sized linear program (LP) requiring optimization over 2|𝑉 𝐹 | distinct state configurations, rendering it computationally intractable for real-time execution monitoring. To overcome this complexity, we upper-bound this LP with a 

> 12 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

polynomially-sized semidefinite program (SDP) by tracking only up to the second-order moments of the state distribution. Invoking Theorem 1, every state transition in our compiled derivation graph has an arity of at most two. This structural property guarantees that the graph logic can be completely projected onto first- and second-order expectations. In the exact LP, the structural constraint forces the joint measure 

𝜇 to have zero support on states that violate the Datalog transition rules. Because the logical identity 

𝑥 𝑣 = 𝜙 𝑣 (𝑥 P ( 𝑣 ) ) holds with probability 1 across all valid states, taking the expectation of both sides yields the identity 𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ] = 𝔼 [𝜙 𝑣 (𝑥 P ( 𝑣 ) )] . Thus, the structural logic of the derivation graph is preserved exactly in moment space as linear equalities. 

𝑅 ★ = max  

> 𝜇

𝔼 [𝑥 𝑡 ] (2a) s.t. Feasibility constraints: 

𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ] = 𝔼 [𝜙 𝑣 (𝑥 P ( 𝑣 ) )] ∀𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 : P ( 𝑣 ) ≠ ∅ (2b) 

𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ] ∈ [ ℓ𝑣 , 𝑢 𝑣 ] ∀𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 : P ( 𝑣 ) = ∅ (2c) Correlation constraints: 

𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 𝑥 𝑣 ′ ] − 𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ]𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ′ ] ≥ 0 ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ POS (2d) 

𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 𝑥 𝑣 ′ ] − 𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ]𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ′ ] ≤ 0 ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ NEG (2e) 

𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 𝑥 𝑣 ′ ] − 𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ]𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ′ ] = 0 ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ IND (2f) where all expectations are evaluated directly with respect to 𝜇 . While Equation 2 reduces the scope of the constraints to low-order moments, searching for a valid global measure 𝜇 remains NP-hard due to the non-linear, non-convex quadratic terms 𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ]𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ′ ] in the covariance definitions. Note that we also add the correlation class constraints described in subsection 3.2. To yield a convex, polynomial-time optimization problem, we drop the requirement of maintaining the full underlying distribution 𝜇 . We introduce a symmetric, positive semidefinite moment matrix 

M ∈ ℝ( | 𝑉 𝐹 |+ 1) × ( | 𝑉 𝐹 |+ 1) to act as a free decision variable representing these low-order expectations directly: 

M = 𝔼 

"1

x

  1

x

⊤#

⪰ 0

The matrix is indexed from 0 to |𝑉 𝐹 |, where the first row and column capture individual marginal probabilities ( 𝑀 0,𝑣 = 𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ]), and the remaining off-diagonal entries capture pairwise joint probabilities (𝑀 𝑣,𝑣 ′ = 𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 𝑥 𝑣 ′ ]). To linearize the non-convex quadratic products 𝑀 0,𝑣 𝑀 0,𝑣 ′ = 𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ]𝔼 [𝑥 𝑣 ′ ], we introduce a sparse set of scalar auxiliary variables 𝑇 𝑣,𝑣 ′ bounded tightly by continuous McCormick envelopes (Mccormick, 1976) defined over the marginal intervals [ℓ𝑣 , 𝑢 𝑣 ]. We formalize the complete semidefinite program-ming relaxation as follows: 

𝑅 ★ 

> SDP

= max  

> M,T

𝑀 0,𝑡 (3a) s.t. Feasibility constraints: 

𝑀 0,𝑣 = 𝔼 M [𝜙 𝑣 (P ( 𝑣 ))] ∀𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 : P ( 𝑣 ) ≠ ∅ (3b) 

ℓ𝑣 ≤ 𝑀 0,𝑣 ≤ 𝑢 𝑣 ∀𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝐹 : P ( 𝑣 ) = ∅ (3c) Correlation constraints: Let 𝐶 = POS ∪ NEG ∪ IND 

> 13 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

𝑀 𝑣,𝑣 ′ − 𝑇 𝑣,𝑣 ′ ≥ 0 ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ POS (3d) 

𝑀 𝑣,𝑣 ′ − 𝑇 𝑣,𝑣 ′ ≤ 0 ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ NEG (3e) 

𝑀 𝑣,𝑣 ′ − 𝑇 𝑣,𝑣 ′ = 0 ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ IND (3f) 

𝑇 𝑣,𝑣 ′ ≥ 𝑀 0,𝑣 ℓ𝑣 ′ + 𝑀 0,𝑣 ′ ℓ𝑣 − ℓ𝑣 ℓ𝑣 ′ ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ 𝐶 (3g) 

𝑇 𝑣,𝑣 ′ ≥ 𝑀 0,𝑣 𝑢 𝑣 ′ + 𝑀 0,𝑣 ′ 𝑢 𝑣 − 𝑢 𝑣 𝑢 𝑣 ′ ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ 𝐶 (3h) 

𝑇 𝑣,𝑣 ′ ≤ 𝑀 0,𝑣 ℓ𝑣 ′ + 𝑀 0,𝑣 ′ 𝑢 𝑣 − 𝑢 𝑣 ℓ𝑣 ′ ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ 𝐶 (3i) 

𝑇 𝑣,𝑣 ′ ≤ 𝑀 0,𝑣 𝑢 𝑣 ′ + 𝑀 0,𝑣 ′ ℓ𝑣 − ℓ𝑣 𝑢 𝑣 ′ ∀( 𝑣, 𝑣 ′) ∈ 𝐶 (3j) Moment feasibility constraints: 

𝑀 𝑣,𝑣 = 𝑀 0,𝑣 ∀𝑣 ∈ { 1, . . . , |𝑉 𝐹 |} (3k) 

𝑀 0,0 = 1, M ⪰ 0 (3l) For any derived fact 𝑣 with a binary parent set P ( 𝑣 ) = {𝑢, 𝑤 }, the expectation operator 𝔼 M [𝜙 𝑣 (P ( 𝑣 ))] 

in constraint (3b) is a strictly linear combination of the elements of M:

𝔼 M [𝜙 𝑣 (𝑢, 𝑤 )] = 𝑀 𝑢,𝑤 𝜙 𝑣 (1, 1)+ ( 1 − 𝑀 0,𝑢 − 𝑀 0,𝑤 + 𝑀 𝑢,𝑤 )𝜙 𝑣 (0, 0)+ ( 𝑀 0,𝑢 − 𝑀 𝑢,𝑤 )𝜙 𝑣 (1, 0)+ ( 𝑀 0,𝑤 − 𝑀 𝑢,𝑤 )𝜙 𝑣 (0, 1)

The resulting optimization problem contains a single matrix variable M with 12 (| 𝑉 𝐹 | + 1)(| 𝑉 𝐹 | + 2)

unique entries, and at most |C| scalar auxiliary variables for T. The number of constraints scales linearly with the number of derived facts |𝑉 𝐹 | and the number of inferred correlation pairs |C| . Consequently, the total size of the optimization problem is 𝑂 (| 𝑉 𝐹 |2 + |C|) , rendering it solvable in polynomial time via standard interior-point methods. 

4.2. Soundness of Semidefinite Relaxation 

To anchor our framework within the ideal runtime guarantees of a probabilistic reference monitor (subsection 2.2), we must prove that our relaxation yields a sound risk estimate. This soundness ensures that the reference monitor will never under-block a policy violation, ensuring strict security guarantees even if conservative computed bounds occasionally induce over-blocking and utility degradation. 

Theorem 2 (Soundness of Semidefinite Relaxation) . Let 𝑅 ∗ be the optimal value of the exact optimization problem over joint state measures (1), and let 𝑅 ∗ 

> SDP

be the optimal value of the relaxed semidefinite program (3). The semidefinite program yields a conservative over-approximation of the true execution risk: 

𝑅 ∗ ≤ 𝑅 ∗

> SDP

Proof. We prove soundness by showing that any joint probability distribution 𝜇 that is feasible in the exact linear program (1) maps to a feasible assignment for the decision variables (M, T) in the semidefinite program (3) . Start with (1) and substitute 𝑀 0,𝑣 ← 𝔼 𝜇 [𝑥 𝑣 ], 𝑀 𝑣,𝑣 ′ ← 𝔼 𝜇 [𝑥 𝑣 𝑥 𝑣 ′ ],

𝑇 𝑣,𝑣 ′ ← 𝔼 𝜇 [𝑥 𝑣 ]𝔼 𝜇 [𝑥 𝑣 ′ ]. Then, there is a clear correspondence between equations (2c) and (3c) and similarly for all constraints in (2) there is a corresponding constraint in (3) . Only two constraints involve some nontrivial mapping: The expectation operator is linear, taking the expectation on both sides of the exact structural logic 𝑥 𝑣 = 𝜙 𝑣 (𝑥 𝑢 , 𝑥 𝑤 ) maps perfectly to the linear identity in constraint (3b) .

> 14 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

Finally, since the marginal expectations are bounded by [ℓ𝑣 , 𝑢 𝑣 ], the products of these expectations structurally satisfy the bilinear McCormick inequalities (3g–3j) by definition. Thus, if M is a valid matrix of second order moments under a true probability measure 𝜇 that satisfies the constraints of (2) , then it must satisfy the constraints (3b–3j). Furthermore, since 𝑥 2 = 𝑥 

for any binary variable 𝑥 , it must also satisfy M𝑣,𝑣 = M0,𝑣 , 𝑀 00 = 1, M ⪰ 0.Thus, for any feasible solution 𝜇 to (2) , constructing M to be the matrix of second order moments produces a feasible solution to (3) with the exact same objective value. However not all solutions M

that are feasible for (3) are guaranteed to be valid second order moments for a distribution 𝜇 that satisfies (2) . Hence the optimal value of (3) is a guaranteed upper bound on the optimal value of (2). □

## 5. Evaluation 

In this section, we evaluate our proposed SDP optimization relaxation against baselines for determin-istic and probabilistic verification. We aim to answer the following research questions: 

RQ1 How effectively does our SDP relaxation balance system utility and security guarantees on terminal agent benchmarks compared to prior work? We find that the SDP achieves the optimal tradeoff outperforming prior art on utility at various fixed security levels (Table 2). 

RQ2 How severely do strict independence assumptions underestimate security risks as input cor-relations increase? We find that assuming independence can systematically overestimate risks when probabilistic predicates are known to be strictly positively correlated, and the overestimation increases as correlations increase (Table 4) .

RQ3 Can we match the performance of prior art on general probabilistic reasoning in security policies written in Datalog? We find that SDP relaxation is effective even on classical security policies matching prior state of the art (Wang et al., 2025), albeit at a higher average latency (Table 2, Table 3 ). The evaluation results, detailed in subsequent sections, showed that our relaxation demonstrates scalability and tightness on security policy tasks with defined input correlations. We also showed that our sound SDP relaxation matches the security of the robust baseline and attains high utility. Finally, we observed that probabilistic inference under independence results in utility degradation under certain correlations. 

5.1. Benchmarks 

We evaluated our framework across a diverse suite of agentic safety and probabilistic logic program-ming tasks designed to test scalability, multi-turn security enforcement, and resilience to correlated inputs. 

Intercode-NL2Bash. We considered 197 trajectories from the Intercode-NL2Bash benchmark (Lin et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2023). To compile these linear shell commands into an explicit lineage, we materialized standard shell pipes ( |) into intermediate file reads and writes, and we mapped each bash command to one of our taint transition types (Table 1). Because Intercode trajectories lack 

> 15 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

explicit data exfiltration events, we appended a terminal data-sharing action to the final output of each trace to evaluate policy compliance. 

ATBench. We also considered 377 agent trajectories from ATBench (Liu et al., 2026). Following the same compilation workflow as Intercode, we mapped interactive tool invocations directly to our taint transition semantics. Unlike Intercode, ATBench natively includes explicit data transmission actions across trust boundaries, which we directly leveraged to evaluate policy violations. 

Side-channel vulnerability analysis. To test our relaxation on other security policies written in Datalog, we considered benchmark tasks from Praline (Wang et al., 2025). We considered six side-channel analysis tasks (Wang et al., 2019), which model information-flow vulnerabilities introduced by compiler register allocation in cryptographic software, tracking whether sensitive intermediate computation results inadvertently share CPU registers or memory locations. These tasks contain up to eight queries and involve complex, highly overlapping dependency chains in their derivation graphs. Unlike Intercode and ATBench, upper and lower prior marginal bounds for these programs are natively provided by the benchmark suite. 

5.2. Experimental Setup 

To compute derivation graphs for each task, we employed Praline’s instrumentation of the Soufflé Datalog evaluation engine (Jordan et al., 2016). While standard Soufflé suppresses duplicate deriva-tion paths for the same relation, this instrumentation allows us to extract complete derivation graphs, capturing all parallel rules that can be applied to derive a given fact. While our goal is distributional robustness, we utilized correlations when they are known in advance. This knowledge could exist in agentic settings if a user provides hints, e.g., files in the same directory might share sensitive data, so their PII detector outputs would be positively correlated. Therefore, we adopted Praline’s two-phase correlation inference algorithm to discover positive, negative, or independent relationships between predicates. In the first phase, the algorithm inferred statistical correlations among input facts in the same correlation class by checking if their joint probabilities deviate from the product of their individual marginals. The second phase performed a lightweight static analysis, propagating known correlation types forward to output predicates. With this inference algorithm, we were able to apply known correlation constraints to the SDP relaxation for the side channel tasks, where correlation classes are defined in advance. For these tasks, prior marginal probabilities for input facts are already provided by the benchmark. In contrast, we assumed no specific correlations for tasks in Intercode and ATBench (unless otherwise specified), and we randomly generated classifier bounds [ℓ𝑣 , 𝑢 𝑣 ] and redaction failure probabilities to simulate environmental uncertainty. For all terminal agent tasks (Intercode and ATBench), we computed the ground truth upper bound using the exact optimization linear program (Equation 1). Because exact optimization is infeasible for complex derivation graphs, we excluded tasks whose combined number of input facts and rules exceeds 12. To evaluate our framework, we used the Splitting Conic Solver (O’donoghue et al., 2016) to solve the SDP. Inline enforcement requires efficient trajectory evaluation to prevent execution stalls; excessive latency defeats the purpose of autonomy by forcing frequent user intervention. Therefore, we imposed a 15-second timeout on all solver-based verifiers. If an engine failed to converge within this window, it fell back to its looser bounds (when applicable). 

> 16 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

Table 2 | Comparison of model performance and AUC across Intercode, ATBench, and Side Channel benchmarks under varying global security risk thresholds 𝜏 . Dashes indicate that there were no positive samples for a given threshold.                                                                                                                               

> Threshold Model Intercode ATBench Side Channel
> Utility Security AUC Utility Security AUC Utility Security AUC
> High Security (𝜏 =0.2)
> Praline 0.979 1.000 0.980 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 —Monte Carlo 1.000 0.600 0.991 1.000 0.884 1.000 1.000 1.000 —Deterministic 0.986 0.716 0.920 1.000 0.835 0.986 1.000 1.000 —SDP (Ours) 1.000 1.000 0.998 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 —
> Medium Security (𝜏 =0.5)
> Praline 0.979 1.000 0.975 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
> Monte Carlo 1.000 0.702 0.989 1.000 0.919 1.000 1.000 0.810 1.000
> Deterministic 1.000 0.702 0.887 1.000 0.950 0.993 1.000 0.143 0.905
> SDP (Ours) 1.000 1.000 0.997 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
> Low Security (𝜏 =0.8)
> Praline 0.971 1.000 0.972 0.996 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000
> Monte Carlo 1.000 0.636 0.991 1.000 0.787 0.993 1.000 1.000 1.000
> Deterministic 0.969 0.939 0.959 0.949 0.965 0.975 0.222 1.000 0.611
> SDP (Ours) 1.000 1.000 0.991 0.983 1.000 0.998 1.000 1.000 1.000

5.3. Baselines 

In our evaluation, we considered two probabilistic verification engines as baselines, as well as a deterministic engine with local thresholds applied to probabilistic predicates. 

Praline. Praline (Wang et al., 2025) is an inference engine designed for Datalog programs with correlated inputs. It first executes the two-phase correlation analysis described in subsection 5.2. Praline then performs approximate inference through the derivation graph using constrained opti-mization, producing sound initial probability bounds. To tighten these intervals, Praline employs an binary search refinement procedure. This loop repeatedly invokes an SMT solver to check constraint satisfiability until converging on a target that is within 𝛿 of the true bounds. We evaluated Praline using the Solving Constraint Integer Programs (SCIP) solver (Achterberg et al., 2008) for constrained optimization and Z3 for SMT solving (de Moura and Bjørner, 2008). 

Monte Carlo. We implemented a Monte Carlo sampling routine to approximate the trajectory risk under the assumption of strict independence. For each base fact 𝑣 , we drew a point probability 

𝑝 𝑣 ∼ Uniform (ℓ𝑣 , 𝑢 𝑣 ) and instantiated its concrete truth value via a Bernoulli trial 𝑥 𝑣 ∼ Bernoulli ( 𝑝 𝑣 ).We ran the deterministic Datalog program on these sampled values to evaluate query satisfaction, averaging the final executing risk across 10 ,000 simulations. 

Deterministic engine. To simulate a deterministic reference monitor, we varied a local binarization threshold from 0.1 to 0.9 in increments of 0.1. For each local threshold, continuous input probabilities were converted to binary assignments and executed directly through the deterministic Datalog program. 

5.4. RQ1: Security-Utility Trade-Off for Terminal Agent Settings 

To evaluate the security-utility balance across the different engines, we modeled policy enforcement as a binary classification task where a positive label corresponds to a reference monitor blocking an agent’s action. Under this formulation, a False Negative (FN) represents a security failure where a policy-violating trajectory is incorrectly allowed, whereas a False Positive (FP) represents a utility loss 

> 17 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

Table 3 | Average latency comparison (ms) between Praline and SDP across Intercode, ATBench, and Side Channel. 

Benchmark Praline SDP (Ours) 

Intercode 1,015 221 

ATBench 7,227 303 

Side Channel 330 1,927 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 100.51

Security 

> Utility

Utility-Security Curve for High Security ( 𝜏 = 0.2)

> SDP (Ours)
> Praline
> Monte Carlo
> Deterministic

0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 100.51

Security 

> Utility

Utility-Security Curve for Medium Security ( 𝜏 = 0.5)

> SDP (Ours)
> Praline
> Monte Carlo
> Deterministic

0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 100.51

Security 

> Utility

Utility-Security Curve for Low Security ( 𝜏 = 0.8)

> SDP (Ours)
> Praline
> Monte Carlo
> Deterministic

Figure 3 | Utility-security (precision-recall) curves for Intercode tasks at global security risk thresholds 

𝜏 ∈ { 0.2, 0.5, 0.8} with smoothing. where a safe trajectory is unnecessarily blocked. True Positives (TP) and True Negatives (TN) denote correctly blocked violations and allowed safe actions, respectively. We formalize utility as precision, where precision = TP TP +FP , which measures the proportion of blocked actions that are genuine security policy violations. Conversely, we formalize security as recall, where recall = TP TP +FN , which measures the proportion of unsafe actions that were correctly blocked. We evaluated the security-utility trade-off across the benchmarks by sweeping the global safety threshold 𝜏 . We report results for utility, security, and area under the utility-security curve (AUC) in Table 2. For each benchmark and model, we performed one evaluation run, only changing the ground truth label depending on the given global threshold. Therefore, we only report one set of latencies for each benchmark (Table 3). For the deterministic engine, we report utility and security for the local threshold that achieved the highest AUC for each benchmark and global safety threshold. Since Praline produces a sound over-estimate of the actual risk, it achieves perfect security; however, solver timeouts on several tasks forced it to return loose, unrefined bounds, resulting in unnecessary blocking and degraded utility. Conversely, MC achieves perfect utility because its independence assumption consistently underestimates worst-case risk, ensuring it never over-blocks at the cost of compromised security. The deterministic engine discards probabilistic information entirely, often leading to low security, utility, or both. In fact, the top-performing deterministic engine displays a degradation in utility as the global threshold increases and a degradation in security as the global threshold decreases. Our SDP relaxation effectively balances this trade-off by computing sound, tight bounds that maximize both security and utility without solver timeouts, thereby maintaining low enforcement computational overhead. To visualize this balance across verification engines, we plotted the utility-security (precision-recall) curves for the Intercode tasks for 𝜏 ∈ { 0.2, 0.5, 0.8} (Figure 3). The curves demonstrate that 

> 18 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

for high and medium global security thresholds, the deterministic baseline suffers from poor utility even at relatively low security levels, rendering it ineffective for practical policy enforcement. In contrast, Praline, Monte Carlo, and our SDP relaxation all demonstrate high utility at high security levels across all global thresholds. However, as the security constraints tighten, Praline and Monte Carlo generally exhibit an earlier drop in utility than SDP. This gap is reflected in the overall AUC scores, where our SDP relaxation consistently outperforms the baselines. 

5.5. RQ2: Independence Assumptions 

For RQ1 , we concluded that Monte Carlo consistently underestimates the upper bound on the violation probability due to its independence assumption, resulting in perfect utility but lower security. For RQ2 ,we aim to understand how independence assumptions can reduce utility under certain correlation assumptions. Accordingly, we created three versions of the Intercode tasks, each with a different level of correlation among the inputs. Under no-correlation assumptions, the setting is the same as in 

RQ1 . Under medium-correlation assumptions, all redactions were declared as independent, and the input files were randomly divided into two correlation classes, indicating that the files within each class were positively correlated. Under high-correlation assumptions, all redactions were declared as independent, and all input files were assigned to the same correlation class, indicating that all input files were positively correlated. To compute the ground truth upper bound on the risk probability, we modified the exact optimization LP (subsection 3.4) to impose these independent and positive correlation constraints. In the most general verification setting, an engine that uses Monte Carlo sampling cannot make any assumptions about whether choosing its samples, either using the lower bound ℓ𝑣 or upper bound 𝑢 𝑣 for an input fact 𝑣 , will result in the greatest violation risk. However, in this specific information-flow setting, state transitions are monotonic, meaning that considering the full range of marginal probabilities [ℓ𝑣 , 𝑢 𝑣 ] does not change the result of the exact LP optimization. Therefore, we modified Monte Carlo to instantiate the concrete truth value for each input fact 𝑣 via a Bernoulli trial over its upper bound, i.e., 𝑥 𝑣 ∼ Bernoulli (𝑢 𝑣 ), rather than first drawing a point probability from Uniform (ℓ𝑣 , 𝑢 𝑣 ).We report results for utility and security under each of the three correlation settings (None, Medium, and High) and the three global security risk thresholds 𝜏 ∈ { 0.2, 0.5, 0.8} (Table 4). The results under no correlation assumptions reflect what we observed in RQ1 , where Monte Carlo’s independence assumptions caused it to consistently underestimate the worst-case risk. This led Monte Carlo to predict many false negatives (high utility but lower security). However, under medium-correlation assumptions, Monte Carlo experienced a drop in utility that degraded even more as inputs became highly correlated, particularly under a high-security global threshold. Without explicit constraints, the worst-case risk was driven by a joint distribution where base input facts were independent, though internal redaction failures remained perfectly correlated. Because Monte Carlo enforces global independence across all variables, it approximated this unconstrained input profile closely enough to reduce false positives. However, when medium- or high-input correlations were introduced, the true worst-case risk bound shrunk. While the SDP relaxation integrates these input constraints to optimize utility, Monte Carlo’s rigid independence assumption overestimates the true risk, resulting in excessive false positives. 

5.6. RQ3: General Probabilistic Security Policies 

For RQ3 , we evaluated the performance of our SDP relaxation on the side-channel vulnerability analysis tasks the Praline benchmarks. These tasks provide both upper and lower prior marginal 

> 19 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

Table 4 | Intercode utility and security for Monte Carlo (MC) and SDP under different global security risk thresholds 𝜏 and input correlation assumptions.                                                        

> Threshold Correlation Model Utility Security High Security (𝜏 =0.2)
> None MC 0.968 0.958
> SDP 1.000 1.000
> Medium MC 0.957 1.000
> SDP 1.000 1.000
> High MC 0.606 1.000
> SDP 0.982 1.000
> Medium Security (𝜏 =0.5)
> None MC 1.000 0.830
> SDP 1.000 1.000
> Medium MC 0.950 1.000
> SDP 1.000 1.000
> High MC 0.833 1.000
> SDP 1.000 1.000
> Low Security (𝜏 =0.8)
> None MC 0.969 0.939
> SDP 1.000 1.000
> Medium MC 0.939 1.000
> SDP 1.000 1.000
> High MC 0.853 1.000
> SDP 1.000 1.000

bounds, as well as defined correlation classes. For these tasks, we adopted the Praline interpretation of input correlation classes. Specifically, Praline treats inputs in the same correlation class as “maybe correlated,” meaning they could be positively correlated or independent. This is in contrast to our interpretation in RQ2 , where inputs defined in the same correlation class were treated as strictly positively correlated. This is an important distinction, since risk may be maximized with the independent assumption or the correlation assumption, depending on the policy. Since these tasks contain more derivation graph nodes than Intercode and ATBench, computing the exact LP optimization is intractable. Therefore, we used the 𝛿 -precise upper bounds computed by Praline running without an execution timeout to serve as our exact ground-truth oracle. Our results in Table 2 demonstrate that SDP and Praline attain perfect security and utility across all global thresholds. Conversely, the independent Monte Carlo baseline and the deterministic engine demonstrated degraded performance across both metrics. While the introduction of correlation constraints over these complex side-channel graphs caused our SDP framework to experience a higher average latency than Praline (Table 3), the SDP relaxation avoids the catastrophic worst-case exponential tail latencies and solver timeouts inherent to exact SMT-based reasoning, demonstrating its viability as a predictable, polynomial-time verification engine. 

## 6. Limitations and Future Work 

Trajectory horizon and bound degradation. The primary limitation of our approach concerns verification over extended execution horizons. As an agent’s trajectory scales, distributionally robust optimization over deep execution traces with high degrees of input-fact merging can cause the risk upper bound to converge to 1.0. This phenomenon occurs even if the initial marginal probabilities 

> 20 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

are minimal. When environmental correlations are unknown a priori , computing a sound upper bound requires conservatively accounting for the worst-case valid joint distribution across every state transition. While this bound degradation is an inherent constraint of distribution-free optimization rather than a flaw of our specific relaxation, it implies that the precision of our framework is limited by the quality of the marginals and specified correlation classes. 

Computational scaling. Our evaluation demonstrates that as derivation graphs deepen and more correlation constraints are integrated, the matrix dimensions of the SDP relaxation expand. This expansion introduces a polynomial increase in the number of decision variables and linear constraints, resulting in higher solver latencies during verification. Beyond a certain graph complexity, this solver overhead could become prohibitively expensive for real-time policy enforcement. While an operational reference monitor could mitigate this by resorting to a manual user-approval prompt when the optimization problem encounters scalability limits, this fallback mechanism risks inducing approval fatigue and fundamentally undermines the utility of autonomous agent execution. 

Ambiguous tool semantics. Another limitation of this work is its reliance on pre-defined tool semantics. While many bash commands can be modeled easily (e.g., cp propagates taint from the source file to the destination file and touch creates a clean file, in their simplest invocations), for many tools these semantics are unclear. Even the Intercode tasks, which represent some of the simplest trajectories among terminal agent benchmarks, contain commands with ambiguous semantics due to their use of execution wrappers around sub-commands, e.g., xargs . While we manually modeled such commands in our evaluation, such modeling is difficult to implement in practice and runs the risk of allowing mimicry attacks (Wagner and Soto, 2002) when tool semantics are underspecified. First, agents are not usually restricted to a small set of bash commands like Intercode. Real-world agents typically write and execute arbitrary Python or Bash scripts on-the-fly, making them impossible to model in advance (Jimenez et al., 2024; Merrill et al., 2026). Second, practical deployments may require checking safety specifications beyond strict information-flow tracking—there could be a need to enforce many different agent policies, each requiring different defined transitions. Therefore, one area for future work is to automatically model commands and scripts as they are generated by the agent, possibly incorporating uncertainty about inferred specifications into the verification itself. 

## 7. Conclusion 

As autonomous AI agents are increasingly trusted with access to sensitive data, deterministic security policy enforcement fails to manage the inherent ambiguity of real-world environments. In this paper, we propose a paradigm shift toward probabilistic agent verification, modeling multi-step trajectory state transitions via a distributionally robust Probabilistic Datalog framework. We formalize this verification as an exact optimization problem that computes a sound upper bound on policy violation risks without relying on unsafe independence assumptions. To ensure runtime viability, we introduce a polynomial-time SDP relaxation that tracks second-order moments of the joint probability distribution. Our evaluation across terminal and tool-calling benchmarks demonstrates that our framework bridges the gap between soundness and tractability, maintaining low latency overhead while optimizing the security-utility trade-off. Ultimately, our framework lays the groundwork for distributionally robust agentic verification, providing a scalable foundation for securing autonomous agents operating in ambiguous environments. 

## References 

T. Achterberg, T. Berthold, T. Koch, and K. Wolter. Constraint integer programming: a new approach to integrate cp and mip. In Integration of AI and OR Techniques in Constraint Programming for 

> 21 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

Combinatorial Optimization Problems , volume 5015 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 6–20. Springer, 2008. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-68155-7_4. K. A. Andersen and J. N. Hooker. A linear programming framework for logics of uncertainty. Decision Support Systems , 16(1):39–53, 1996. J. P. Anderson. Computer Security Technology Planning Study. Technical Report ESD-TR-73-51, U.S. Air Force Electronic Systems Division, 10 1972. V. BáRány, B. T. Cate, B. Kimelfeld, D. Olteanu, and Z. Vagena. Declarative probabilistic programming with datalog. ACM Transactions on Database Systems , 42(4), Oct. 2017. ISSN 0362-5915. doi: 10.1145/3132700. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3132700 .L. Bourtoule. Lack of isolation in agentic browsers resurfaces old vul-nerabilities, May 2026. URL https://blog.trailofbits.com/2026/01/13/ lack-of-isolation-in-agentic-browsers-resurfaces-old-vulnerabilities/ .S. Chen, J. Piet, C. Sitawarin, and D. Wagner. Struq: defending against prompt injection with structured queries. In Proceedings of the 34th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium , SEC ’25, USA, 2025a. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-52-6. S. Chen, A. Zharmagambetov, S. Mahloujifar, K. Chaudhuri, D. Wagner, and C. Guo. Secalign: Defending against prompt injection with preference optimization. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , CCS ’25, page 2833–2847, New York, NY, USA, 2025b. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400715259. doi: 10.1145/3719027.3744836. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3719027.3744836 .Z. Chen, M. Kang, and B. Li. Shieldagent: Shielding agents via verifiable safety policy reasoning. In 

Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025c. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=DkRYImuQA9 .M. Costa, B. Köpf, A. Kolluri, A. Paverd, M. Russinovich, A. Salem, S. Tople, L. Wutschitz, and S. Zanella-Béguelin. Securing ai agents with information-flow control, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2505.23643 .J. Crampton. A reference monitor for workflow systems with constrained task execution. In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies , SACMAT ’05, page 38–47, New York, NY, USA, 2005. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 1595930450. doi: 10.1145/ 1063979.1063986. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1063979.1063986 .L. de Moura and N. Bjørner. Z3: An efficient smt solver. In C. R. Ramakrishnan and J. Rehof, editors, 

Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , pages 337–340, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-78800-3. L. De Raedt, A. Kimmig, and H. Toivonen. Problog: a probabilistic prolog and its application in link discovery. In Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artifical Intelligence , IJCAI’07, page 2468–2473, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2007. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. E. Debenedetti, J. Zhang, M. Balunovic, L. Beurer-Kellner, M. Fischer, and F. Tramèr. Agentdojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate prompt injection attacks and defenses for LLM agents. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track ,2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=m1YYAQjO3w .

> 22 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

E. Debenedetti, I. Shumailov, T. Fan, J. Hayes, N. Carlini, D. Fabian, C. Kern, C. Shi, A. Terzis, and F. Tramèr. Defeating prompt injections by design. In 4th IEEE Conference on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning , 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18813 .D. E. Denning. A lattice model of secure information flow. Communications of the ACM , 19(5):236–243, May 1976. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/360051.360056. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/360051. 360056 .D. E. R. Denning. Cryptography and Data Security . Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, Dec. 1982. D. Fierens, G. Van den Broeck, J. Renkens, D. Shterionov, B. Gutmann, I. Thon, G. Janssens, and L. De Raedt. Inference and learning in probabilistic logic programs using weighted boolean formulas. 

Theory and Practice of Logic Programming , 15(3):358–401, 2015. S. Ghalebikesabi, E. Bagdasaryan, R. Yi, I. Yona, I. Shumailov, A. Pappu, C. Shi, L. Weidinger, R. Stan-forth, L. Berrada, P. Kohli, P.-S. Huang, and B. Balle. Operationalizing contextual integrity in privacy-conscious assistants, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.02373 .J. Gray. Toward a mathematical foundation for information flow security. In Proceedings. 1991 IEEE Computer Society Symposium on Research in Security and Privacy , pages 21–34, 1991. doi: 10.1109/RISP.1991.130769. S. Holtzen, G. Van den Broeck, and T. Millstein. Scaling exact inference for discrete probabilistic programs. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 4(OOPSLA), Nov. 2020. doi: 10.1145/3428208. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3428208 .H. Inan, K. Upasani, J. Chi, R. Rungta, K. Iyer, Y. Mao, M. Tontchev, Q. Hu, B. Fuller, D. Testuggine, and M. Khabsa. Llama guard: Llm-based input-output safeguard for human-ai conversations, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06674 .C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei, O. Press, and K. R. Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66 .H. Jordan, B. Scholz, and P. Subotić. Soufflé: On synthesis of program analyzers. In S. Chaudhuri and A. Farzan, editors, Computer Aided Verification , pages 422–430, Cham, 2016. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-41540-6. A. Kamath, S. Zhang, C. Xu, S. Ugare, G. Singh, and S. Misailovic. Enforcing temporal constraints for llm agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.23738 .M. Kim, M. Parmar, P. Wallis, L. Miculicich, K. Jung, K. D. Dvijotham, L. T. Le, and T. Pfister. Causalarmor: Efficient indirect prompt injection guardrails via causal attribution, 2026. URL 

> https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.07918

.H. Li, X. Liu, C. H. Chun, D. Li, N. Zhang, and C. Xiao. DRIFT: Dynamic rule-based defense with injection isolation for securing LLM agents. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=oY1Xnt83oJ .Z. Li, J. Huang, and M. Naik. Scallop: A language for neurosymbolic programming. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 7(PLDI), June 2023. doi: 10.1145/3591280. URL https: //doi.org/10.1145/3591280 .Z. Li, W. Hua, H. Wang, H. Zhu, and Y. Zhang. Formal-llm: Integrating formal language and natural language for controllable llm-based agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00798 .

> 23 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

X. V. Lin, C. Wang, L. Zettlemoyer, and M. D. Ernst. NL2Bash: A corpus and semantic parser for natural language interface to the linux operating system. In N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, C. Cieri, T. Declerck, S. Goggi, K. Hasida, H. Isahara, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, H. Mazo, A. Moreno, J. Odijk, S. Piperidis, and T. Tokunaga, editors, Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018) , Miyazaki, Japan, May 2018. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). URL https://aclanthology.org/L18-1491/ .D. Liu, Q. Ren, C. Qian, S. Shao, Y. Xie, Y. Li, Z. Yang, H. Luo, P. Wang, Q. Liu, B. Hu, L. Tang, J. Mei, D. Guo, L. Yuan, J. Yang, G. Chen, Q. Lin, Y. Yu, B. Zhang, J. Guo, J. Zhang, W. Shao, H. Deng, Z. Xi, W. Wang, W. Wang, W. Shen, Z. Chen, H. Xie, J. Tao, J. Dai, J. Ji, Z. Ba, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Zhang, L. Zhu, Z. Wei, H. Xue, C. Lu, J. Shao, and X. Hu. Agentdog: A diagnostic guardrail framework for ai agent safety and security, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.18491 .R. Manhaeve, S. Dumancic, A. Kimmig, T. Demeester, and L. D. Raedt. Deepproblog: neural probabilis-tic logic programming. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS’18, page 3753–3763, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018. Curran Associates Inc. G. P. Mccormick. Computability of global solutions to factorable nonconvex programs: Part i – convex underestimating problems. Mathematical Programming , 10(1):147–175, Dec. 1976. ISSN 0025-5610. doi: 10.1007/BF01580665. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01580665 .M. A. Merrill, A. G. Shaw, N. Carlini, B. Li, H. Raj, I. Bercovich, L. Shi, J. Y. Shin, T. Walshe, E. K. Buchanan, J. Shen, G. Ye, H. Lin, J. Poulos, M. Wang, M. Nezhurina, D. Lu, O. M. Mastromicha-lakis, Z. Xu, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, R. Zhang, L. L. Chen, A. Kashyap, J.-L. Uslu, J. Li, J. Wu, M. Yan, S. Bian, V. Sharma, K. Sun, S. Dillmann, A. Anand, A. Lanpouthakoun, B. Koopah, C. Hu, E. K. Guha, G. H. S. Dreiman, J. Zhu, K. Krauth, L. Zhong, N. Muennighoff, R. K. Amanfu, S. Tan, S. Pimpalgaonkar, T. Aggarwal, X. Lin, X. Lan, X. Zhao, Y. Liang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Zhou, D. Heineman, H. Liu, H. Trivedi, J. Yang, J. Lin, M. Shetty, M. Yang, N. Omi, N. Raoof, S. Li, T. Y. Zhuo, W. Lin, Y. Dai, Y. Wang, W. Chai, S. Zhou, D. Wahdany, Z. She, J. Hu, Z. Dong, Y. Zhu, S. Cui, A. Saiyed, A. Kolbeinsson, C. M. Rytting, R. Marten, Y. Wang, J. Jitsev, A. Dimakis, A. Konwinski, and L. Schmidt. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. URL 

> https://openreview.net/forum?id=a7Qa4CcHak

.L. Miculicich, M. Parmar, H. Palangi, K. D. Dvijotham, M. Montanari, T. Pfister, and L. T. Le. Veriguard: Enhancing llm agent safety via verified code generation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510. 05156 .A. C. Myers and B. Liskov. A decentralized model for information flow control. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , SOSP ’97, page 129–142, New York, NY, USA, 1997. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 0897919165. doi: 10.1145/268998. 266669. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/268998.266669 .B. O’donoghue, E. Chu, N. Parikh, and S. Boyd. Conic optimization via operator splitting and homogeneous self-dual embedding. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications , 169(3): 1042–1068, June 2016. ISSN 0022-3239. doi: 10.1007/s10957-016-0892-3. URL https://doi. org/10.1007/s10957-016-0892-3 .N. Palumbo, S. Choudhary, J. Choi, G. Amir, P. Chalasani, and S. Jha. Formal policy enforcement for real-world agentic systems, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.16708 .J. S. Park, J. O’Brien, C. J. Cai, M. R. Morris, P. Liang, and M. S. Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium 

> 24 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

on User Interface Software and Technology , UIST ’23, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400701320. doi: 10.1145/3586183.3606763. URL https: //doi.org/10.1145/3586183.3606763 .T. Rebedea, R. Dinu, M. N. Sreedhar, C. Parisien, and J. Cohen. NeMo guardrails: A toolkit for controllable and safe LLM applications with programmable rails. In Y. Feng and E. Lefever, editors, 

Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 431–445, Singapore, Dec. 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.40. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-demo.40/ .A. Sabelfeld and A. C. Myers. Language-based information-flow security. IEEE Journal on selected areas in communications , 21(1):5–19, 2003. T. Sang, P. Bearne, and H. Kautz. Performing bayesian inference by weighted model counting. In 

Proceedings of the 20th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Volume 1 , AAAI’05, page 475–481. AAAI Press, 2005. ISBN 157735236x. T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessí, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Hambro, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom. Toolformer: language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Associates Inc. F. B. Schneider. Enforceable security policies. ACM Transactions on Information and System Security ,3(1):30–50, Feb. 2000. ISSN 1094-9224. doi: 10.1145/353323.353382. URL https://doi.org/10. 1145/353323.353382 .T. Shi, J. He, Z. Wang, H. Li, L. Wu, W. Guo, and D. Song. Progent: Securing ai agents with privilege control, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11703 .M. D. S. R. Team, U. Oren, A. Eliahu, and D. Edry. When prompts become shells: Rce vulnerabilities in ai agent frameworks, May 2026. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/security/blog/2026/05/ 07/prompts-become-shells-rce-vulnerabilities-ai-agent-frameworks/ .L. Tsai and E. Bagdasarian. Contextual agent security: A policy for every purpose. In Proceedings of the 2025 Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems , HotOS ’25, page 8–17, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400714757. doi: 10.1145/3713082.3730378. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3713082.3730378 .E. Tsamoura, V. Gutierrez-Basulto, and A. Kimmig. Beyond the grounding bottleneck: Datalog techniques for inference in probabilistic logic programs. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 34(06):10284–10291, Apr. 2020. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i06.6591. URL 

> https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/6591

.D. Wagner and P. Soto. Mimicry attacks on host-based intrusion detection systems. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security , CCS ’02, page 255–264, New York, NY, USA, 2002. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 1581136129. doi: 10.1145/ 586110.586145. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/586110.586145 .B. Wanders, M. van Keulen, and J. Flokstra. Judged: a probabilistic datalog with dependencies. In 

Workshops at the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2016. H. Wang, C. Poskitt, and J. Sun. AgentSpec: Customizable Runtime Enforcement for Safe and Reliable LLM Agents . In 2026 IEEE/ACM 48th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , Los Alamitos, CA, USA, May 2026. IEEE Computer Society. 

> 25 Efficient and Sound Probabilistic Verification for AI Agents

J. Wang, C. Sung, and C. Wang. Mitigating power side channels during compilation. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , ESEC/FSE 2019, page 590–601, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450355728. doi: 10.1145/3338906.3338913. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3338906.3338913 .J. Wang, S. Halalingaiah, W. Chen, C. Wang, and I. Dillig. Probabilistic inference for datalog with correlated inputs. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 9(OOPSLA2), Oct. 2025. doi: 10.1145/3763058. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3763058 .W. Wiesemann, D. Kuhn, and M. Sim. Distributionally robust convex optimization. Operations Research , 62(6):1358–1376, Dec. 2014. ISSN 0030-364X. F. Wu, E. Cecchetti, and C. Xiao. System-level defense against indirect prompt injection attacks: An information flow control perspective, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19091 .J. Yang, A. Prabhakar, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao. Intercode: standardizing and benchmarking interactive coding with execution feedback. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Associates Inc. S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X .Q. Zhan, Z. Liang, Z. Ying, and D. Kang. Injecagent: Benchmarking indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 10471–10506, 2024. H. Zhang, J. Huang, K. Mei, Y. Yao, Z. Wang, C. Zhan, H. Wang, and Y. Zhang. Agent security bench (ASB): Formalizing and benchmarking attacks and defenses in LLM-based agents. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= V4y0CpX4hK .C. Zheng, F. Yin, H. Zhou, F. Meng, J. Zhou, K.-W. Chang, M. Huang, and N. Peng. On prompt-driven safeguarding for large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24, 2024. J. Zhu, K. Tseng, G. Vernik, X. Huang, S. G. Patil, V. Fang, and R. A. Popa. Miniscope: A least privilege framework for authorizing tool calling agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.11147 .