Title: Learning to Adapt: Representation-Based Reinforcement Learning for Multi-Task Skill Transfer

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.12890v1

Published Time: Fri, 12 Jun 2026 00:32:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Learning to Adapt: Representation-Based Reinforcement Learning for Multi-Task Skill Transfer 

Aryan Naveen, Haitong Ma, Haldun Balim, Na Li 

Abstract — Reinforcement learning has achieved remarkable success in learning complex control policies, yet its applicability remains limited due to sample inefficiency and poor general-ization across tasks. In this work, we propose RepMT-SAC, a framework for multi-task RL that enables efficient knowledge sharing and robust transfer to new tasks. RepMT-SAC uses spectral MDP decomposition to capture transferable dynamics, structuring the value function into a task-agnostic core with a minimal task-specific adjustment. This design allows for strong zero-shot performance on in-distribution tasks and rapid few-shot adaptation to out-of-distribution tasks. We evaluate RepMT-SAC on quadcopter trajectory-following tasks across in-distribution and out-of-distribution contexts, demonstrating that it outperforms baselines by up to 30%. 

I. INTRODUCTION Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful framework for learning control policies in complex, high-dimensional systems [1], [2]. While traditional formulations focus on single-task settings with well-specified reward func-tions, many potential applications are inherently multi-task, requiring agents to solve a distribution of related Markov decision processes (MDPs). In such settings, tasks often exhibit substantial shared structure—arising from common environment dynamics, state representations, or underlying physical laws—suggesting that knowledge acquired from one task should, in principle, be transferable to others. Despite this potential, standard RL approaches largely treat tasks independently [3], leading to policies that overfit to task-specific reward signals and fail to exploit shared structure across tasks. This results in poor generalization, limited zero-shot transfer, and high sample complexity when adapting to new tasks [4], [5]. The core challenge lies in disentangling task-specific objectives from task-invariant structure, such as shared dynamics, to enable the learning of reusable representations. In this work, we focus on a class of multi-task MDPs in which all tasks share the same underlying system dynamics but differ in their reward functions or reference objectives. This setting is common in control applications—for example, a quadrotor required to track different trajectories operates under identical dynamics across tasks. Such shared dynamics 

> This work was supported by NSF AI institute: 2112085, NSF ECCS-2401390, ONR N000142512173 A. Naveen is currently affiliated with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. This work was primarily carried out during his undergradu-ate studies at the Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences.

aryannav@mit.edu              

> H. Ma, H. Balim, and N. Li are with Harvard School of En-gineering and Applied Sciences,

haitongma@g.harvard.edu, hbalim@fas.harvard.edu, nali@seas.harvard.edu 

induce a latent structure that can be leveraged to enable efficient knowledge transfer and improved generalization. However, conventional RL methods often entangle this struc-ture with task-specific learning signals, preventing effective reuse of learned representations. Our goal is to explicitly exploit this shared-dynamics structure to improve sample efficiency and generalization across tasks. Recent work in multi-task RL has begun to explore leveraging shared structure through latent task inference and value decomposition. Methods such as [6], [7] model tasks as latent variables, enabling fast adaptation but implicitly entangling dynamics and rewards within learned embed-dings. In contrast, other approaches factorize value functions into shared dynamics-dependent features and task-specific rewards [8], but these features are conditioned on a specific policy and capture only aspects of the dynamics relevant to expected returns. While these extensions enhance scalability and stability, they primarily rely on implicit sharing or value-based decompositions. In contrast, our approach leverages recent advances in spectral decompositions of MDPs to ex-plicitly parameterize task-invariant dynamics as a standalone object, enabling disentanglement without depending on latent embeddings or value functions. Recent work in theoretical reinforcement learning has explored spectral decompositions of Markov Decision Pro-cesses (MDPs) [9] [10] [11], offering a framework for learning environment-aware representations. The resulting spectral functions of the transition dynamics in MDPs can 

linearly model the state-action value function. These repre-sentations can be leveraged to efficiently synthesize policies for the modeled task, and when the representations are unknown, several sample-efficient learning methods—such as maximum likelihood estimation [11], contrastive learning [12], or variational approaches—have been proposed to dis-cover them from interaction data [13] [14]. Nevertheless, while existing spectral decomposition meth-ods aim to learn task-independent representations, in practice these representations often conflate task-specific and task-agnostic information [11], [13]. This entanglement limits their ability to generalize across tasks, as the learned skills may encode unnecessary task-dependent details. In this work, we propose an alternative perspective: the Q-function for any task can be expressed as a linear combination of truly task-agnostic skills, each weighted by the task. By explicitly separating skill representations from task-specific objectives, our approach enables reusable, transferable policies and more efficient adaptation to new tasks. Building on this insight, we propose Rep resentation 

> arXiv:2606.12890v1 [cs.RO] 11 Jun 2026

Multi-Task learning framework (RepMT ), a multi-task framework designed to explicitly disentangle task-invariant environment representations from task-specific objectives. In the upstream phase, RepMT learns representations for task-agnostic dynamics that capture reusable skills across the environment. During task-specific finetuning, the framework learns task-dependent weights that combine these skills into an effective policy for each task. RepMT is tested on quadcopter trajectory-following tasks spanning both in domain and out of domain settings. It achieves strong zero-shot performance on in-distribution tasks and rapidly adapts to out-of-distribution tasks with minimal finetuning, outperforming SAC [3] and CTRL-SAC [12]. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the necessary notation, the multi-task setting. Section III extends existing spectral decomposition to the multi-task setting and subsequently Section IV presents RepMT-SAC, covering the critic’s structural parameteriza-tion, upstream learning of dynamics and task representations, and downstream finetuning for rapid adaptation. Section V evaluates RepMT-SAC on quadcopter trajectory-following tasks, demonstrating substantial improvements in reward, task success rate, and adaptation speed over SAC and prior representation-based RL methods. II. P RELIMINARIES 

In this section, we first formalize the multi-task reinforce-ment learning problem and introduce the task-conditioned MDP framework. We then present our grounding applica-tion of quadrotor trajectory tracking, followed by a brief overview of spectral representations and their relevance to MDP decomposition. 

A. Problem Setup 

In this work, we extend the standard MDP formulation to capture a family of stochastic control problems parameter-ized by a task variable τ ∈ T . Formally, we model the multi-task setting as a collection of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) indexed by τ , where T denotes a measurable task space. Each task τ induces an MDP of the form: 

M(τ ) = ( S, A, r τ , P, ρ, γ ),

where S and A denote the shared state and action spaces, respectively; P is the shared transition kernel, ρ is the initial state distribution, and γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor. While the state and action spaces, as well as the dynamics P and initial distribution ρ, are assumed to be task-invariant, the reward function rτ : S × A → R is task-dependent, which we denote explicitly as 

rτ (s, a ) := r(s, a, τ ), ∀s ∈ S , a ∈ A .

Definition 2.1 (Task Distribution): We assume a probabil-ity distribution μ ∈ ∆( T ) over tasks. Sampling from μ

induces a stochastic process over MDPs: first, a task τ ∼ μ

is drawn, and subsequently, a policy π is executed in the corresponding MDP M(τ ).Given the task distribution μ and the family of MDPs 

{M (τ )}τ ∈T , we consider task conditioned policies: π : S × T → ∆( A), which explicitly condition the policy on the task variable τ .In this paper, we focus on task-conditioned policies. For a given task-conditioned policy π, we define the task-specific action-value function as: 

V π (s; τ ) := E

" ∞X

> t=0

γt r(st, a t, τ ) s0 = s

#

,Qπ (s, a ; τ ) := Eπ,P 

" ∞X

> t=0

γtr(st, a t, τ ) s0 = s, a 0 = a

#

.

The goal of multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) is to optimize the expected return across tasks drawn from μ.Formally, the MTRL objective is defined as 

J(π) := Eτ ∼μ

h

Es0∼ρ[V π (s0; τ )] 

i

.

Definition 2.2 (MTRL Optimal Policies): We formally denote the MTRL optimal policy as the policy that maximizes the expected return across a task distribution μ:

π∗ ∈ arg max  

> π

J(π).

By conditioning policies on the task variable, one can learn strategies that adapt to diverse objectives while leveraging shared structure across tasks. To put these optimal policies into practice, we must ensure that the multi-task formulation remains well-behaved while preserving the underlying Bell-man properties. The existence and uniqueness of these task-conditioned value functions are grounded in the theoretical properties of the multi-task Bellman operators. Specifically, for each task τ ∈ T , we define the task-specific Bellman operator T πτ acting on value functions as 

(T πτ V )( s) := Ea∼π(·| s,τ )

r(s, a, τ ) + γEs′∼P (·| s,a )V (s′) .

(1) Similarly, to bridge the gap toward the globally optimal task-conditioned policy π∗, we define the optimal Bellman operator: 

(T ∗ 

> τ

V )( s) := sup 

> a∈A

r(s, a, τ ) + γEs′∼P (·| s,a )V (s′) . (2) The utility of these operators in the multi-task setting stems from their stability across the task distribution μ.Even as the reward function shifts with τ , the underlying contraction property remains invariant: the standard MDP result that the Bellman operator is a γ-contraction in the sup-norm applies here as well, since the dependence on τ

only affects the rewards and not the contraction induced by 

γ ∈ (0 , 1) .This stability allows us to view the multi-task landscape not as a collection of disjoint problems, but as a single augmented MDP. By defining the state space as ˜S = S × T ,we can express the dynamics as 

˜P (( s′, τ ) | (s, τ ), a ) = P (s′ | s, a ) δ(τ ), (3) where the task remains fixed throughout the trajectory, effec-tively “freezing” the task context while the agent navigates the shared state space. B. Quadrotor Trajectory Following 

To ground the theoretical framework of multi-task rein-forcement learning (MTRL) in a concrete physical system, we consider the control problem of quadrotor trajectory fol-lowing in this paper. In this setting, the quadrotor must learn a generalized control policy capable of following diverse flight paths by treating each unique trajectory as a specific task τ .In the context of autonomous flight, the shared dynamics 

P represent the task invariant physical properties of the quadrotor (e.g., mass, inertia, and aerodynamic coefficients). We define the components of the multi-task MDP as follows: 

a) State Space S: The task-invariant state s ∈ S

captures the full kinematic and dynamic configuration of the vehicle: 

s = [ p, v, q, ω]⊤ ∈ R13 , (4) where p ∈ R3 is the position, v ∈ R3 is the linear velocity, 

q ∈ H is the unit quaternion representing orientation, and 

ω ∈ R3 is the angular velocity in the body frame. 

b) Task Space T : A task τ corresponds to a specific reference trajectory pref . To facilitate efficient learning and ensure the task variable is informative, we encode τ using a hybrid representation: 1) Polynomial Coefficients: The global structure of the trajectory is defined by coefficients of a polynomial trajectory (as explained later in Section V), providing a compact time-invariant global context. 2) Sliding Reference Window: To simplify the learning task, we include a long-horizon temporal window of future waypoints {pref ,t +k}Nk=1 . This provides the pol-icy with immediate local geometry, such as upcoming curvature or heading changes. 

c) Reward Function r(s, a, τ ): The reward is task-dependent as it penalizes deviations from the specific ref-erence τ . This formally is captured by: 

r(s, a, τ ) = −



w1∥p − pref ∥22 + w2∥v − vref ∥22 + w3h(s)



,

(5) where the weights wi balance tracking precision against control effort, and h(s) is a function designed to encourage stable flight behaviors and avoid aggressive maneuvers. By utilizing the augmented state ˜s = ( s, τ ), the quadrotor must navigate a higher-dimensional manifold where the “frozen” task variable τ acts as a constant parameter through-out the episode. III. S PECTRAL DECOMPOSITION MULTI -T ASK MDP EXTENSION 

We now extend the spectral decomposition of MDPs to the multi-task setting defined above. The goal is to repre-sent task-conditioned value functions in a low-dimensional, linearly parameterized form while separating task-invariant dynamics from task-specific rewards. 

Definition 3.1 (Spectral Decomposition of MTRL MDPs): 

Let M(τ ) be a multi-task MDP as defined in Section II. We say that M(τ ) admits a spectral decomposition if there exists a task-invariant feature map 

ϕ : S × A → Rd

and task-dependent reward parameter mapping 

θ : T → Rd

such that the reward function can be expressed as a linear combination of features: 

r(s, a, τ ) = ⟨ϕ(s, a ), θ (τ )⟩, ∀s ∈ S , a ∈ A , τ ∈ T . (6) 

Lemma 3.1 (Spectral Decomposition of Task Q-Function): 

For any task-conditioned policy π, the action-value function 

Qπ (s, a ; τ ) admits a linear parameterization: 

Qπ (s, a ; τ ) = ⟨ϕ(s, a ), w π (τ )⟩, (7) where the weight vector wπ (τ ) captures both the immedi-ate task-specific reward and the discounted expected future returns under π.

Proof: Starting from the task-conditioned Bellman equation: 

Qπ (s, a ; τ ) = r(s, a, τ ) + γ Es′∼P (·| s,a )[V π (s′; τ )] = ⟨ϕ(s, a ), θ (τ )⟩ + γ Es′∼P (·| s,a )

Ea′∼π(·| s′,τ )[Qπ (s′, a ′; τ )] .

Assuming Qπ (s′, a ′; τ ) = ⟨ϕ(s′, a ′), w π (τ )⟩, we have 

Qπ (s, a ; τ ) = ⟨ϕ(s, a ), θ (τ )⟩ + γ Es′,a ′ [⟨ϕ(s′, a ′), w π (τ )⟩]= ⟨ϕ(s, a ), θ (τ ) + γ Es′,a ′ [ϕ(s′, a ′)⊤wπ (τ )] 

| {z }  

> wπ(τ)

⟩.

Hence, Qπ (s, a ; τ ) admits the linear form (7). Note that this result extends classical spectral or linear 

Q-function representations [12] in a critical way: whereas prior work assumes that both the feature map ϕ(s, a ) and the weight vector w are fixed constants independent of the task, our decomposition treats wπ (τ ) as an explicit function of the task descriptor τ . Concretely, in single-task or task-agnostic settings, one writes Qπ (s, a ) = ⟨ϕ(s, a ), w π ⟩ where wπ ∈

Rd is a single vector summarizing the value structure of the unique reward signal. In the multi-task setting, however, each task τ induces a distinct reward parameter θ(τ ) and, consequently, a distinct weight vector wπ (τ ). The feature map ϕ(s, a ) remains shared and task-invariant , encoding the geometry of the state-action space, while all task-specific in-formation is absorbed into wπ (τ ). Connection to the MTRL Objective: Given the linear representation of Qπ (s, a ; τ ), the task-specific value function is 

V π (s; τ ) = Ea∼π(·| s,τ )[Qπ (s, a ; τ )] = Ea∼π(·| s,τ )[⟨ϕ(s, a ), w π (τ )⟩].

Consequently, the multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) objective can be expressed as 

J(π) = Eτ ∼μ

h

Es0∼ρ

V π (s0; τ )i

(8) 

= Eτ ∼μ

h

Es0∼ρ,a 0∼π(·| s0,τ )[⟨ϕ(s0, a 0), w π (τ )⟩]

i

. (9) Equation (9) explicitly shows that maximizing the ex-pected return across tasks reduces to learning task-dependent weights wπ (τ ) while leveraging the shared, task-invariant features ϕ(s, a ).Source Tasks 

Replay 

Buffer   

> Rollout Transitions
> Dynamics Representation Learning
> Encoder
> Encoder
> Spectral
> Conditional
> Density Estimation
> Loss
> Value Function Learning
> Temporal
> Difference
> Los s
> Pretrained Task -
> invariant dynamics
> Pretrained Task
> Encodings
> Pretrained Policy
> Policy Learning

Upstream Phase: Joint Learning on Source Tasks 

New Tasks  

> New Task Transitions
> FROZEN
> Frozen
> Finetune
> Temporal Difference
> Los s
> Finetuned Task
> Encodings
> Finetuned
> Policy

Downstream Phase: Fast Adaption to OOD tasks 

> PRETRAINED & FROZEN
> Task invariant Dynamics
> Task dependent
> embeddings

Legend Fig. 1: Illustration of the two-phase learning paradigm. In the upstream phase (top), task-invariant dynamics representations and task-dependent embeddings are jointly learned from replayed transitions across source tasks. In the downstream phase (bottom), the learned dynamics are frozen while task-specific embeddings and the policy are fine-tuned for rapid adaptation to unseen tasks. IV. R EP MT-SAC: R EPRESENTATION -BASED 

MULTI -T ASK RL In this section, we propose RepMT-SAC , a novel vari-ant of the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm designed for multi-task reinforcement learning. RepMT-SAC leverages the proposed MTRL parameterization to disentangle learning task-invariant environment dynamics from task-specific ob-jectives, enabling efficient reuse of learned dynamics across tasks. As described in Figure 1, in the upstream phase, the framework jointly optimizes task-agnostic representations of the environment and task-dependent encodings of the Q-function, from which a maximum-entropy policy is derived. During downstream adaptation, the learned dynamics are frozen, and only the task encodings and policy are up-dated to rapidly specialize to new tasks. This two-phase approach allows RepMT-SAC to achieve strong zero-shot performance on in-distribution tasks and fast adaptation to out-of-distribution tasks, improving sample efficiency and generalization compared to standard multi-task RL baselines. 

A. Upstream Phase: Learning Task-Invariant Representa-tions 

In the upstream phase, RepMT-SAC focuses on captur-ing reusable, task-invariant dynamics while simultaneously learning task-specific encodings that parameterize the Q-function. Concretely, we decompose the state-action value function for any task τ as specified in equation 9, where 

ϕ(s, a ) represents the task-agnostic dynamics, and wπ (τ )

encodes task-dependent contributions. We follow the spec-tral conditional density estimation framework, which aims to learn task-invariant dynamics representations (ϕ, μ ) by approximating the conditional transition density P (s′ | s, a ).Formally, the ideal objective is 

min  

> ϕ,μ

E(s,a )∼D ,s ′∼P (·| s,a )

h

P (s′ | s, a ) − ⟨ ϕ(s, a ), μ (s′)⟩ 22

i

(10) 

where D is the replay buffer of collected transitions. However, this is typically intractable, since P (s′ | s, a ) is unknown. To address this, we adopt a sampling-based approximate loss based on the cross-entropy loss proposed in [12]: 

−E(s,a )∼D ,s ′∼P (·| s,a )

h

log exp  ⟨ϕ(s, a ), μ (s′)⟩P 

> s′′ ∈D

exp  ⟨ϕ(s, a ), μ (s′′ )⟩i

(11) 

Subsequently, the task encoding w(τ ; θ) is updated via a temporal-difference (TD) objective: 

min  

> θ

E

h r + γ ¯Q(s′, τ, π (s′; τ )) − w(τ ; θ)⊤ϕ(s, a )2i

(12) where we sample (s, τ, a, r, s ′) from D and ¯Q is the target Q-function commonly used in the target network trick [2]. The advantage of this parameterization is that, compared to traditional deep Q-learning [15], the policy evaluation optimization is a linear function, yielding much more stable learning. The task-invariant representation ϕ(s, a ) is learned jointly with the TD loss, ensuring it captures the underlying dynamics shared across all tasks. Finally, a maximum-entropy policy π(a | s◦, s τ ) is derived from the learned Q-function following the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) framework. Specifically, the policy is parameterized to maximize both expected return and entropy, encouraging exploration and robustness: 

π(a | s◦, s τ ) ∝ exp 

 1

α Q(s◦, s τ , a )



(13) where α is the temperature coefficient controlling the trade-off between reward maximization and entropy. In practice, we implement this using the reparameteri-zation trick, which allows efficient gradient-based updates of the policy parameters. As summarized in algorithm 1, by combining the task-invariant representations ϕ(s, a ) with task-specific encodings w(τ ) in the Q-function, this approach produces a flexible, reusable policy that can be rapidly adapted during downstream task-specific finetuning. 

Algorithm 1 Upstream Phase of RepMT-SAC  

> 1:

Input: MDPs for source tasks Mτ1 , . . . , Mτk 

> 2:

Initialize task-invariant representations ϕ, μ , task encod-ings wθ , critics Q1, Q 2, policy π, target networks ¯Q1, ¯Q2 

> 3:

for episode n = 1 to N do  

> 4:

Collect transitions (s, τ, a, r, s ′) and store in replay buffer D 

> 5:

Update task-invariant representations (ϕ, μ ) by min-imizing 11  

> 6:

Update task encoding wθ via 12  

> 7:

Update policy π according to 13  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Output: Task-invariant representations ϕ, μ , task encod-ings wθ , policy π

B. Downstream Adaptation to Unseen Tasks 

Once the upstream phase has learned robust task-invariant dynamics ϕ(s, a ) and the auxiliary representation μ(s′),RepMT-SAC can efficiently adapt to new, unseen task distribution ˆμ. In this downstream phase, we freeze the task-invariant representations and only optimize the task-specific encoding w(τ ; θ) and the policy π(a | s, τ ). This significantly reduces the number of parameters to train and improves sample efficiency. By decoupling task-invariant dynamics from task-specific contributions, this downstream adaptation procedure allows RepMT-SAC to achieve fast specialization with very few environment interactions, enabling strong zero-shot perfor-mance when combined with task embeddings inferred from limited data. Algorithm 2 summarizes this process. 

Algorithm 2 Downstream Adaptation of RepMT-SAC  

> 1:

Input: New task MDP Mτnew , frozen representations 

ϕ, μ , and pretrained w and π 

> 2:

for episode n = 1 to Nadapt do  

> 3:

Collect transitions (s, τ, a, r, s ′) in the new task  

> 4:

Update wτnew using TD loss with frozen ϕ and μ

according to 12  

> 5:

Update policy πτnew according to maximum-entropy objective  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Output: Adapted task encoding wτnew , policy πτnew 

This two-stage decomposition—learning reusable dy-namics upstream and fast task-specific adaptation down-stream—forms the core of RepMT-SAC, enabling both multi-task generalization and rapid adaptation to previously unseen environments. V. E XPERIMENTS 

We evaluate the proposed multi-task reinforcement learn-ing framework for quadrotor trajectory following using the formalism established in Section II in IsaacSim. Each tra-jectory corresponds to a task τ ∈ T , and the quadrotor must learn a policy π(s, τ ) that generalizes across both in-distribution and out-of-distribution trajectories. 

Fig. 2: Visualization of the task decomposition used for evaluation. Source tasks form a basis set used during training, in-distribution tasks are convex combinations within this span, and out-of-distribution tasks extend beyond it via higher-order legendre polynomials. 

A. Trajectory Representation and Task Parameterization 

Following Section II, we encode each task τ as a param-eterized polynomial trajectory. Formally, each trajectory is represented by a vector of coefficients: 

τ = [ c0, c 1, . . . , c d],

with the continuous trajectory defined by 

f (t) = 

> d

X

> i=0

ciψi(t), ψi(t) Legendre polynomials [16]. TABLE I: Performance comparison of CTRL, SAC, and RepMT methods across Source, In-Distribution (ID), and Out-of-Distribution (OOD) tasks. Metrics include mean reward (R) and success rate (S), with OOD results shown both before and after fine-tuning. Bold values indicate the best performance for each metric.                                                                                 

> Method Source R Source S ID R ID S OOD R (Before) OOD S (Before) OOD R (After) OOD S (After) CTRL 377.9 ±35.4 0.0 ±0.0 432.1 ±128.4 0.0 ±0.0 300.8 ±114.2 0.0 ±0.0 481.1 ±183.6 0.0 ±0.0 SAC 857.1 ±277.9 60.0 ±54.8 876.1 ±294.4 60.0 ±54.8 524.4 ±180.4 26.7 ±27.9 775.6 ±155.6 40.0 ±54.8 RepMT 1094.2 ±17.9 100.0 ±0.0 1100.7 ±16.1 100.0 ±0.0 577.8 ±388.1 53.3 ±50.6 1034.8 ±23.3 100.0 ±0.0

This representation aligns directly with the task-dependent reward r(s, a, τ ) and the augmented state ˜s = ( s, τ ) de-scribed in Section II. The coefficients {ci} serve as a com-pact embedding of the task variable for the policy π(s, τ ),facilitating both learning and generalization. 

B. Task Hierarchy and Evaluation Distributions 

To assess generalization, we define three task sets consis-tent with our earlier notation and visualized in Figure 2: 1) Source Tasks bT ⊂ T : A set of fundamental poly-nomial basis functions (e.g., ψ0, ψ 1, ψ 2) used for up-stream training. The policy is trained on these tasks, corresponding to a uniform sampling distribution μtrain 

over bT .2) In-Distribution Tasks T ID ⊂ T : Tasks formed as convex combinations of the source tasks, 

τ ID = X 

> i∈bT

αiψi, αi ∈ [−1, 1] , X

> i

αi = 1 .

These tasks remain in the span of the source basis, corresponding to the distribution μID , and allow us to measure generalization within the learned task mani-fold. 3) Out-of-Distribution Tasks T OOD ⊂ T : Higher-degree polynomials or tasks with coefficients outside the training range (e.g., ψ3, ψ 4, ψ 5), defining μOOD . Per-formance on these tasks evaluates the policy’s ability to transfer beyond the span of source tasks. In this framework, the polynomial coefficients naturally define the task-dependent component of the augmented state, 

τ , while the quadrotor’s odometry, orientation, velocity, and angular rates correspond to the task-invariant component , s,as introduced in Section II. 

C. Evaluation Protocol 

For each framework we run 5 trials across different seeds in order to evaluate the learned policies on:  

> •

Source Task Performance: Average return over bT

sampled from μtrain , measuring learning performance.  

> •

In-Distribution Performance: Average return over T ID 

sampled from μID , measuring generalization within the span of training tasks.  

> •

Out-of-Distribution Performance: Average return over T OOD sampled from μOOD , assessing transfer and adaptability to unseen trajectories.  

> •

Fine-Tuning: For OOD tasks, we further apply down-stream fine-tuning of the policy, optimizing 

JOOD (π) = Eτ ∼μOOD [Es0∼ρV π (s0; τ )] ,

highlighting the utility of the learned task embedding 

w(τ ) for rapid adaptation. This experimental setup ties directly to the multi-task MDP formalism: the augmented state ˜s = (s, τ ), task-conditioned policy π(s, τ ), and reward r(s, a, τ ) follow exactly from the definitions and lemmas established in Sec-tion II. The hierarchy of source, ID, and OOD tasks allows a clear quantification of generalization and transfer across the task distribution μ.

D. Baselines and Ablations 

We compare our approach against strong off-policy re-inforcement learning baselines and ablations designed to isolate the contributions of our method. In particular, we use 

Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [3] as our primary baseline, as it represents the state-of-the-art for continuous control and off-policy controller learning. To better understand the impact of our proposed represen-tation structure, we also consider an ablated variant of our method, referred to as CTRL-SAC [12]. This variant incor-porates a standard representation learning objective within the SAC framework but does not explicitly enforce the task-structured decomposition introduced in our approach. Together, these baselines allow us to evaluate both over-all performance gains and the specific benefits of our representation-based multi-task formulation. 

E. Performance on Source Tasks 

Fig. 3: Comparison of learning curves across methods during upstream training. RepMT demonstrates stable, monotonic improvement with low variance, while baseline methods exhibit higher variance and less consistent convergence. The performance on source tasks bT highlights the su-perior stability and asymptotic performance of the RepMT 

framework. As illustrated in Fig. 3, RepMT exhibits anear-monotonic increase in total reward with significantly lower variance compared to the SAC baseline, which suffers from pronounced oscillations and performance degradation after approximately 160 , 000 iterations. Quantitatively, Ta-ble I shows that RepMT achieves a perfect success rate of 100 .0 ± 0.0% and a total reward of 1094 .2 ± 17 .9,significantly outperforming both SAC (857 .1 ± 277 .9) and the CTRL ablation ( 377 .9 ± 35 .4). This performance gain in fewer pretraining iterations is largely attributable to our task-structured value function parameterization V (s; τ ), which utilizes the Legendre polynomial coefficients to provide a more consistent and informative gradient signal than standard off-policy methods. 

F. Performance on In-Domain Tasks 

To evaluate the policy’s ability to generalize within the learned task manifold, we tested the frameworks on in-distribution (ID) tasks T ID consisting of convex combina-tions of the source basis functions. As shown in Table I, 

RepMT demonstrates exceptional zero-shot generalization, maintaining a 100 .0 ± 0.0% success rate and a mean reward of 1100 .7 ± 16 .1.This performance represents a significant improvement over the baselines. While SAC achieves a mean reward of 876 .1, it suffers from high variance ( ±294 .4) and a success rate of only 60 .0 ± 54 .8% , suggesting that standard off-policy reinforcement learning fails to consistently cover the interpolated task space. More notably, the CTRL abla-tion—which incorporates representation learning without our task-structured decomposition—fails to solve the ID tasks entirely, plateauing at a 0.0% success rate. The contrast between RepMT and CTRL underscores that the explicit partitioning of the augmented state ˜s = ( s, τ )

is essential for effective multi-task learning. By encoding tasks via a compact coefficient vector, the RepMT policy does not merely overfit to individual source trajectories but instead learns a continuous control manifold. This allows the quadrotor to interpolate seamlessly between fundamental ma-neuvers, confirming that our structured embedding captures the shared dynamics necessary for robust execution across the entire task distribution μID .

G. Downstream Adaptation to Out-of-Distribution Tasks 

Finally, we evaluate the adaptability of the learned rep-resentations through downstream fine-tuning on OOD tasks 

T OOD . Following the pretraining phase, each model is fine-tuned for only 25 , 000 iterations—merely 10% of the initial training budget. As shown in Table I, RepMT exhibits sub-stantially faster convergence and superior final performance, achieving a perfect 100 .0 ± 0.0% success rate and a total reward of 1034 .8 ± 23 .3.In contrast, the baselines struggle to adapt within this limited timeframe. While SAC shows marginal improvement, rising from 26 .7% to 40 .0% success, it remains unable to 

> (a) Performance on an OOD trajectory defined by a degree-4 Legendre polynomial.
> (b) Performance on an OOD trajectory defined by a degree-5 Legendre polynomial.
> (c) Performance on an OOD trajectory defined by a degree-6 Legendre polynomial.

Fig. 4: Comparison of quadrotor trajectories under different methods after finetuning on OOD tasks. RepMT closely follows the reference trajectory, while SAC show deviations and instability, even after downstream adaptation. reliably follow the higher-degree polynomial trajectories. The 

CTRL baseline fails to achieve any successful completions (0.0% ), despite a slight increase in total reward. This per-formance gap is qualitatively visualized in Fig. 4, where the RepMT trajectories (green) closely track the ground truth (black) across various OOD profiles, while SAC (blue) frequently deviates or fails to reach the target. The efficiency of this adaptation highlights the utility of our learned task embedding w(τ ). Because the RepMT 

value function is parameterized to recognize the underlying structure of the trajectory space, fine-tuning becomes amatter of rapid weight adjustment within a well-structured manifold, rather than a tabula rasa search for a new control policy. This demonstrates that our framework provides a robust foundation for transferring zero-shot capabilities to novel, complex maneuvers with minimal additional data. VI. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we introduced RepMT , a multi-task reinforce-ment learning framework for quadrotor trajectory following that leverages a structured decomposition of task-invariant and task-dependent state components. By parameterizing the value function using Legendre polynomial coefficients, our approach provides a stable and informative gradient signal, leading to superior asymptotic performance and gen-eralization. RepMT achieves a 100% success rate on in-distribution tasks and enables rapid adaptation to complex, out-of-distribution trajectories with only 10% of the original pretraining budget. A limitation of the current work is the hand-crafted nature of μtrain . Future work will focus on leveraging the learned task latent embeddings w(τ ) to guide structured exploration within the task space and identify regions of the manifold that maximize policy robustness. Furthermore, we hypothesize that the stability and structured nature of the 

RepMT representations will facilitate more reliable Sim2Real transfer building on the work proposed in [17]. We plan to validate this by deploying the framework on physical quadrotor platforms and evaluating its resilience to real-world dynamics and environmental disturbances. REFERENCES [1] C. Tang, B. Abbatematteo, J. Hu, R. Chandra, R. Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, and P. Stone, “Deep reinforcement learning for robotics: A survey of real-world successes,” Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 153–188, 2025. [2] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski 

et al. , “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” 

nature , vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015. [3] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor,” CoRR , vol. abs/1801.01290, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.01290 [4] T. Yu, S. Kumar, A. Gupta, S. Levine, K. Hausman, and C. Finn, “Gra-dient surgery for multi-task learning,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 5824–5836, 2020. [5] G. Dulac-Arnold, N. Levine, D. J. Mankowitz, J. Li, C. Padu-raru, S. Gowal, and T. Hester, “An empirical investigation of the challenges of real-world reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11881 , 2020. [6] K. Rakelly, A. Zhou, D. Quillen, C. Finn, and S. Levine, “Efficient off-policy meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables,” CoRR , vol. abs/1903.08254, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.08254 [7] L. Zintgraf, K. Shiarlis, M. Igl, S. Schulze, Y. Gal, K. Hofmann, and S. Whiteson, “Varibad: A very good method for bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08348 , 2019. [8] A. Barreto, R. Munos, T. Schaul, and D. Silver, “Successor features for transfer in reinforcement learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1606.05312, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05312 [9] C. Jin, Z. Yang, Z. Wang, and M. I. Jordan, “Provably efficient rein-forcement learning with linear function approximation,” in Conference on learning theory . PMLR, 2020, pp. 2137–2143. [10] L. Yang and M. Wang, “Reinforcement learning in feature space: Matrix bandit, kernels, and regret bound,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 10 746–10 756. [11] M. Uehara, X. Zhang, and W. Sun, “Representation learning for online and offline rl in low-rank mdps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04652 ,2021. [12] T. Zhang, T. Ren, M. Yang, J. Gonzalez, D. Schuurmans, and B. Dai, “Making linear mdps practical via contrastive representation learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2022, pp. 26 447–26 466. [13] T. Ren, C. Xiao, T. Zhang, N. Li, Z. Wang, S. Sanghavi, D. Schuur-mans, and B. Dai, “Latent variable representation for reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08765 , 2022. [14] T. Ren, T. Zhang, L. Lee, J. E. Gonzalez, D. Schuurmans, and B. Dai, “Spectral decomposition representation for reinforcement learning,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.09515 , 2022. [15] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller, “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 , 2013. [16] I. M. Ross and F. Fahroo, “Legendre pseudospectral approximations of optimal control problems,” in New trends in nonlinear dynamics and control and their applications . Springer, 2004, pp. 327–342. [17] H. Ma, Z. Ren, B. Dai, and N. Li, “Skill transfer and discovery for sim-to-real learning: A representation-based viewpoint,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) .IEEE, 2024, pp. 8603–8609.