Title: AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25707v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 02:36:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
## AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Jingwei Sun 1 Jianing Zhu 2 Yuanyi Li 1 Tongliang Liu 3 Xia Hu 4 Bo Han 1

Abstract 

Autonomous computer use agents that powered by multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are emerging as capable assistants for complet-ing complex digital workflows. However, real-world execution environments are far from ideal: pop-ups, resolution changes, and competing ap-plications frequently interfere with agent percep-tion and control. We introduce AgentHijack, a benchmark designed to evaluate the robustness of computer-use agents under common corruptions, where the uncertainties in dynamic environment disrupt the execution flow without direct adversar-ial intent. Specifically, AgentHijack introduces 9 configurable common corruptions to replicate re-alistic imperfect scenarios. We evaluate a variety of desktop tasks that utilize MLLM-based agents and discover that even minor instances of corrup-tion can result in substantial performance degrada-tion, which emphasizes the fragility of agents and underscores the necessity of robustness evaluation. Afterward, we propose AgentHijack-Agent, a framework that integrates an action generator with enhanced grounding capabilities and an onlooker responsible for behavior summarization and en-vironment checking. Extensive experiments val-idate its effectiveness. Our code, environment, baseline models and data are publicly available at: 

https://AgentHijack.github.io .

1. Introduction 

Benefiting from the advancement of multimodal large lan-guage models (Achiam et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2025) (MLLMs), computer-using 

> 1

TMLR Group, Hong Kong Baptist University 2The University of Texas at Austin 3Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney 

> 4

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Correspondence to: Bo Han <bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

agents have witnessed vigorous development (Yang et al., 2025c; Qin et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025). Recent repre-sentative benchmarks, such as OSWorld (Xie et al., 2024), WebArena (Zhou et al., 2023), and AndroidWorld (Rawles et al., 2024), have demonstrated that MLLM-based agents can show excellent performance at various kinds of tasks, in-cluding daily office assistance (Agashe et al., 2024; Jia et al., 2025), system interface operation (Yu et al., 2024; Koh et al., 2024), and professional software utilization (Jimenez et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024), thus unlocking significant prospects for GUI operation automation, manual workload reduction, and the realization of seamless human-agent collaboration. Unfortunately, existing MLLM-based agents remain highly vulnerable to uncertainties in dynamic environments (Zhang et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b). As illustrated in Fig-ure 1, the state-of-the-art models UI-TARS-7B-DPO and UI-TARS-1.5-7B experience substantial performance degra-dation when confronted with corruptions which are common during daily computer use, such as pop-ups, accidental touch and network error, posing potential risks to the real-world deployment of GUI agents. This underscores the urgency of evaluating this kind of robustness, which is a critical aspect that has long been overlooked by previous benchmarks (Xie et al., 2024; Rawles et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025a). As summarized in Table 1, prior works exhibit three key limi-tations: 1) Studies such as (Deng et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024; Rawles et al., 2024) primarily focus on agent task success rates in clean environments, whereas real-world scenarios are far from such idealized settings. 2) Although some studies (Zhan et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Tur et al., 2025; Lee et al., 2024; Evtimov et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025a) have explored the robustness of agents under abnormal en-vironment, their investigations are mainly confined to agent execution tendencies when confronted with adversarial at-tacks. 3) The few works (Ma et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025b) that focus on agent robustness against common corruptions typically adopt a question-answering evaluation paradigm, which lacks realistic executable environments and fails to support flexible customized configurations. In this paper, we introduce AgentHijack, a comprehensive benchmark designed to evaluate the corruption robustness 1

> arXiv:2605.25707v1 [cs.AI] 25 May 2026

AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Marks        

> Subtitle
> 17.22 %
> 3.77%
> Number, Size, etc.
> Content, Color, etc. Error
> Minimization
> Ours UI -TARS -1.5 -7B 3.72%
> 6.03%
> Relative Decline Rate of UI -TARS
> Pop ups
> Marks
> Verification
> Network Error
> Subtitle
> App Minimization
> Multi Apps
> Accidental Touch
> Resolution
> Corruptions
> 19.20%
> 48.70%
> 17.72%
> 15.99%
> 13.77%
> 14.51%
> 3.77%
> 17.22%
> 38.09%
> Configurable
> Content, Size, etc.
> Number, Size, etc.
> Perturb Step
> Perturb Step, Local IP
> Content, Color, etc.
> Perturb Step
> Another Apps
> Perturb Step, etc.
> Scale
> Pop ups
> Resolution
> Marks
> Multi
> Apps
> Accidental
> Touch
> Network
> Error
> Verification
> App
> Minimization
> Subtitle
> 56.71%
> 9.05%
> 13.92%
> 6.90%
> 20.94%
> 6.03%
> 57.54%
> 3.72%
> 51.71 %
> UI -TARS -7B -DPO UI -TARS -1.5 -7B Ours

Figure 1. AgentHijack: benchmark robustness of computer use agents in corrupted scenarios. Agenthijack can generate configurable corrupted scenarios, encompassing 9 common corruption types such as pop-ups, identity verification, and resolution modifications. UI-TARS series, the state-of-the-art agents, exhibit significant performance degradation under these corrupted scenarios, highlighting that constructing a benchmark to evaluate agent robustness against common corruptions is key for agents deployment in real-world. We propose an agent framework that integrates an action generator with enhanced grounding capabilities and an onlooker responsible for behavior summarization and environment checking, achieving universal performance improvements across various corruptions. 

of MLLM-based computer-using agents. We create 9 con-figurable common corruptions and apply them to OSWorld, resulting in a total of 3,321 tasks. We hope that AgentHi-jack will play an important role in assessing the corruption robustness of MLLM-based computer-using agents and con-tribute to the development of more trustworthy agents in the future. We conducted extensive evaluations on various MLLM-based agent baselines, covering open-source mod-els (Dubey et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2025; Team et al., 2026), closed-source models (Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2025), and specialized models (Qin et al., 2025). Experimental results demonstrate that current agents struggle to maintain performance when confronted with common corruptions, indicating substantial room for im-provement. Specifically, these agents often exhibit unstable grounding capabilities, their execution plans are susceptible to interference, and they tend to fail to detect environmental errors, thus engaging in incessant meaningless attempts. To address these weakness, we propose a novel GUI agent framework named AgentHijack-Agent. It integrates an ac-tion generator with enhanced grounding capability and an onlooker responsible for behavioral summarization and en-vironment checking. Specially, we propose data-augmented group relative policy optimization to enhance the grounding capability of agents in diverse environments and prompt it to act as onlooker to provide an auxiliary perspective. This design enables the action generator to better comprehend historical execution trajectories and rectify errors when en-vironmental anomalies arise. To validate the effectiveness rationality of the proposed framework, we perform exten-sive experiments and conduct comprehensive discussions on corruptions with different intensity, content, and location. We anticipate that our work will underscore the importance of GUI agents robustness and inspire more follow-up re-searches in this field. Our main contributions are as follows: 

• Statistically, we introduce AgentHijack, a detailed benchmark tailored for evaluating the corruption ro-bustness of computer-using agents (in Section 3). 

• Technically, we propose AgentHijack-Agent, which innovatively integrate action generator and onlooker to improve agent corruption robustness (in Section 4). 

• Experimentally, we conduct extensive explorations to illustrate the weakness of current agents and the effec-tiveness of the proposed framework (in Section 5). 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Computer-Use Agents 

In recent years, the advancement of multimodal large lan-guage models (MLLMs) has greatly propelled researches on computer-use agents. Foundation models, such as GPT-4o (Achiam et al., 2023), Claude (Anthropic, 2024), Gem-ini (Team et al., 2023), and Qwen-VL (Bai et al., 2025), benefit from powerful visual and textual processing capabil-ities acquired via pretraining on massive datasets, showing strong proficiency in following natural language instruc-tions, interpreting screen layouts, and understanding GUI actions. Agent frameworks (Agashe et al., 2024; Jia et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025c) built upon these foundation mod-els, as well as fine-tuned specialized models (Lin et al., 2025; Hong et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2025), have further un-locked the potential of agents to tackle sophisticated tasks in open environments. For instance, GTA1 (Yang et al., 2025c) leverages GPT-4o as a planner to effectively address planning ambiguities in complex GUI environments; UI-TARS (Qin et al., 2025) enhances its task planning and grounding capabilities based on Qwen-VL, achieving out-standing performance in complex GUI manipulation tasks; 2AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Table 1. Comparison of different benchmarks on computer-use agents. # Number of Tasks: The number of tasks. Environment Platform : The simulation environment. Multi-modal Support? : Whether agents support multi-modal inputs. Abnormal Environment? :Whether the environment is abnormal rather than clean. Common Corruptions? : Whether the corruptions are common rather than adversarial. Configuration Support? : Whether the corruptions are configurable. # Categories of Corruptions : The number of category.                                                                                                                              

> # Number of Tasks Environment Platform Multi-modal Support? Abnormal Environment? Common Corruptions? Configuration Support? # Categories of Corruptions
> MIND 2W EB (Deng et al., 2023) 2350 QA Format ✓✗N/A N/A N/A WEB ARENA (Zhou et al., 2023) 812 BrowserGym ✓✗N/A N/A N/A OSW ORLD (Xie et al., 2024) 369 Virtual Machine ✓✗N/A N/A N/A ANDROIDWORLD (Rawles et al., 2024) 116 Android Emulator ✓✗N/A N/A N/A INJECAGENT (Zhan et al., 2024) 1054 QA Format ✗✓✗✗6R-J UDGE (Yuan et al., 2024) 569 QA Format ✗✓✗✗5AGENT -S AFETY BENCH (Zhang et al., 2024) 2000 QA Format ✗✓✗✗8ENV . D ISTRACTIONS (Ma et al., 2024) 1198 QA Format ✓✓✓✗4GUI-R OBUST (Yang et al., 2025b) 5318 QA Format ✓✓✓✗7SAFE ARENA (Tur et al., 2025) 250 BrowserGym ✓✓✗✗5ST-W EB AGENT BENCH (Levy et al., 2024) 234 BrowserGym ✓✓✗✗3MOBILE SAFETY BENCH (Lee et al., 2024) 80 Android Emulator ✓✓✗✗5WASP (Evtimov et al., 2025) 84 BrowserGym ✓✓✗✗1VISUAL WEB ARENA -A DV (Wu et al., 2024) 200 BrowserGym ✓✓✗✗1RIOSW ORLD (Yang et al., 2025a) 492 Virtual Machine ✓✓✗✗13
> AgentHijack 3321 Virtual Machine ✓✓✓✓9

and ARPO (Lu et al., 2025) resolves the challenge of sparse rewards to enable stable end-to-end agent optimization. 

2.2. Performance Evaluation of Computer-Use Agents 

To evaluate the performance of computer-using agents, a variety of benchmarks have been proposed to assess agents’ capability to accomplish diverse computer-related tasks. For example, pioneering benchmarks such as Mind2Web (Deng et al., 2023) and WebArena (Zhou et al., 2023) simulate realistic web environments; OSWorld (Xie et al., 2024) offers comprehensive evaluations across a wide range of tasks spanning daily, office, and professional scenarios; and AndroidWorld (Rawles et al., 2024) provides a dedicated benchmark for mobile environments. Beyond task perfor-mance assessment, the robustness of agents has also gar-nered increasing attention. Specifically, benchmarks such as Injecagent (Zhan et al., 2024), R-Judge (Yuan et al., 2024), Agent-SafetyBench (Zhang et al., 2024), SafeArena (Tur et al., 2025), and WASP (Evtimov et al., 2025) evaluate the vulnerability of models to malicious instructions and prompt injection attacks; ST-WebAgentBench (Levy et al., 2024) focuses on the security of web agents in enterprise en-vironments; MobileSafetyBench (Lee et al., 2024) assesses the security of agents for mobile device; VisualWebArena-Adv (Wu et al., 2024) emphasizes agent reliability when screenshots are perturbed; and RiOSWorld (Yang et al., 2025a) delivers comprehensive evaluations against various attacks. Despite these efforts, existing researches remain limited: most studies focus on evaluating the adversarial robustness of computer-using agents while ignoring their corruption robustness. Although few studies (Ma et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025b) focus on evaluating robustness, they lack realistic or diverse environments. This leaves a critical gap in the comprehensive assessment of robustness for computer-using agents on common corruptions. 

3. Benchmarking the Robustness 

In this section, we introduce AgentHijack, a benckmark for evaluating the robustness of computer-use agents when facing common corruptions. First, we illustrate the prelimi-nary of computer-use agents (in Section 3.1). Second, we define corruption robustness and distinguish them from ad-versarial robustness (in Section 3.2). Third, we present the construction of AgentHijack (in Section 3.3). 

3.1. Preliminary 

An autonomous agent implements computer-related task 

x ∈ D , where D is the task set, can be formalized as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) 

(S, O, A, T ), where S is the set of environment states, O is an observation function (e.g., screenshots), A is the action space (e.g., click, type), and T denotes transition dynamics. At each step, the agent interacts with the environment in a closed loop as it iteratively selects executable action at ∈ A 

in step t according to current observation ot ∈ O , which re-sults in a new state st+1 ∈ S by T : S × A → S . When the maximum number of steps T (e.g., 15 in our experiments) is reached or the agent outputs the termination flag (e.g. Done 

or Fail ), a reward function R is called to assign values between 0 and 1 to measure whether the final state meets the task objective y, i.e., R(sT = y|x, (S, O, A, T )) ∈ [0 , 1] .More detailed information, including the initial setup of en-vironment states, the information of observation space, the definition for action space and the construction of reward function can be found in Appendix A. 3AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Type 

> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Click
> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Click
> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Click
> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Click
> Misattribute Changes
> to Prior Actions
> Click
> Click
> Save before
> Creating
> Type
> Click
> Incorrect
> Operation Position
> Hotkey
> Incorrect
> Operation Position
> Click
> Click Bias
> Click

Thought: Great! The dialog box for 

creating a new file has popped up. I see 

that the input field is ready for me to 

enter the file name. Now, I need to type 

"test.py" here and then press the Enter 

key to confirm. This will create a 

Python source code file. 

Action: type(content='test.py') 

Thought: I just opened the File menu 

and noticed that there's an option for 

"Save As..." which is exactly what I 

need. By clicking on it, I can open the 

save dialog box and specify that this file 

should be saved on the desktop. 

Action: click( start_box =(142,445)) 

Thought: I noticed that the user is 

looking for a way to restore the previous 

tab. In this situation, the most 

straightforward approach is to use 

keyboard shortcuts. I'm planning to 

press Ctrl+Shift+T , which will allow me 

to quickly bring back the last closed tab. 

Action: hotkey(key=' ctrl+shift+t ') 

Thought: I just tried the Help menu, 

but it didn't work out. However, I 

noticed that there's a File option in the 

top menu bar. Since we're looking for a 

way to restore previous tabs, this seems 

like a more appropriate place to start. 

Let me click on the File option and see 

if there are any useful features available. 

Action: click( start_box =(1022,78)) 

Can you make my computer bring back the last tab I shut down? 

Thought: The image has finally 

finished loading, and I can see that the 

colors are a bit dull. To make the photo 

more vibrant, I need to adjust the color 

settings. Let me click on the "Colors" 

option in the top menu bar so that I can 

find suitable tools to enhance the 

saturation and brightness of this image. 

Action: click( start_box =(372,76)) 

Thought: I noticed that the Colors menu 

has been expanded, and there are several 

options available. To make the photo 

more vibrant, adjusting the saturation is 

a great choice. I found it; it's right there 

in the menu as "Saturation...". Clicking 

on it will open up the adjustment panel. 

Action: click( start_box =(413,159)) 

Could you assist me in enhancing the color vibrancy of my photo? 

> Skip several steps

Please help me create a new python file named "test.py" via VS 

Code and save it at "home/user/Desktop". 

Thought: I see that the system is 

currently in a login state, and I need to 

log out before I can proceed with setting 

up my signature. Let me click on the 

power button in the upper right corner 

of the screen to exit this login interface. 

Action: click( start_box =(1906,13)) 

Thought: I just opened the power menu, 

and now I need to locate the "Power Off 

/ Log Out" option. This is a crucial step 

for logging out of the system, and 

clicking it will take me to the next 

interface. 

Action: click( start_box =(1642,190)) 

Thought: It seems that the Delta 

Airlines website is currently 

inaccessible, displaying a message 

indicating that it cannot be reached. 

However, that's alright; I'll start by 

clicking on the address bar and entering 

the correct URL to see if I can access it 

again. 

Action: click( start_box =(314,126)) 

Thought: It seems that the website isn't 

opening, but I noticed that the address 

bar is already selected. Let me try 

entering delta.com directly; that should 

help me bypass any potential issues with 

the current URL and access Delta 

Airlines official site. 

Action: type(content='delta.com') 

Find flights from Seattle to New York on 5th next month and 

only show those that can be purchased with miles. 

Thought: I see that the file selection 

window has opened, and now I need to 

locate the desktop folder. In this 

interface, there's a "user" directory on 

the left side, which is exactly what I'm 

looking for. The desktop folder should 

be inside it, so let me double -click to 

enter and take a look .

Action: click( start_box =(732,395)) 

Thought: I just accidentally clicked on 

the user folder, which caused the file 

selection window to close. It's alright, 

though; I know what to do next. I need 

to reopen the Media menu in VLC and 

select "Open File..." again so that I can 

continue searching for that music video 

on my desktop. 

Action: click( start_box =(674,378)) 

Could you play the music video that's saved on my desktop for 

me via vlc ?

Set up a signature using my name and affiliation. My name is 

Anonym and my affiliation is XYZ Lab. 

> Click
> Click Bias
> Click

Thought: Let me take a look at the 

current situation. I need to export this 

student grade sheet into CSV format. 

The first step is to locate the export 

function, which should be found in the 

File menu at the top left corner of the 

interface. I'll click on it now and see 

what options are available. 

Action: click( start_box =(1906,13)) 

Thought: I noticed that the File menu 

has been expanded, there's a "Save As" 

option in the File menu. This feature 

should allow me to choose a different 

file format for saving, which is exactly 

what I need right now. Let me click on it 

and see if I can find an option to export 

as CSV. 

Action: click( start_box =(135,302)) 

Thought: Let me think about how to 

start clearing the Amazon tracking data. 

The first step is to open the browser's 

settings menu, which can be found in 

the upper right corner of Chrome. I need 

to click on that three -dot icon located at 

the top right of the browser window. 

Action: click( start_box =(1891,30)) 

Thought: Great! I've finally accessed 

the interface for clearing browsing data. 

I see that all the options are checked, 

and the time range is set to "All time." 

Now, all I need to do is click the "Delete 

data" button in the lower right corner of 

the interface to remove all of Amazon's 

tracking information. Let's go ahead and 

complete this final step. 

Action: click( start_box =(1208,858)) 

Can you help me clean up my computer by getting rid of all the 

tracking things that Amazon might have saved? I want to make 

sure my browsing is private and those sites don't remember me. 

> Click
> Click Bias
> Click Bias

Thought: I noticed that a pop -up 

appeared on the screen, indicating that a 

new extension needs to be installed. In 

order to proceed with setting up Bing as 

my default search engine, I first need to 

address this pop -up. There's an "OK" 

button in the center of the window, and 

clicking it will close the notification. 

Action: click( start_box =(1029,273)) 

Thought: I just clicked the "OK" button, 

but it seems like nothing happened. It 

looks like this pop -up is still there, so I 

need to click the "OK" button again to 

close it. Only then can we continue with 

setting up Bing as our default search 

engine. 

Action: click( start_box =(1029,788)) 

> Click

Can you make Bing the main search thingy when I look stuff up 

on the internet? 

> Click
> Unnecessary
> Click
> Unnecessary
> Click
> Skip several steps

Could you help me to export the current sheet to a csv file? The 

csv should share the file name with the original xlsx. 

> Click
> Skip several steps Accidental Touch
> App Minimization

Figure 2. Case study of various corruptions in AgentHijack. UI-TARS-1.5-7B exhibits deviations in its grounding capability when facing visual disruptors. It lacks the ability to judge the consequences of prior actions and is prone to being distracted by triggered content when encountering unexpected operations. Additionally, it consistently makes meaningless attempts when facing environmental errors. 

3.2. Corruption Robustness 

We now define corruption robustness and distinguish them from adversarial robustness. Most existing computer-use agents benchmarks evaluate the performance of an agent based on the its average performance on the given task set, i.e., E(x,y )∈D (R(sT = y|x, (S, O, A, T ))) . However, in a vast range of cases, environments are far from ideal. Therefore, we suggest also measuring the corruption robust-ness of computer-use agents, i.e., ECi∈C ,(x,y )∈D (R(sT =

y|x, (Ci(S), Ci(O), A, Ci(T )))) . Ci is the corruption from the corruption set C, which causes environmental error, or perturbation in observations and state transitions. This con-trasts with the notion of adversarial robustness proposed by previous works(Yang et al., 2025a), which is formulated as E(x′,y ′)∈D ′ (R(sT = y′|x′, (S, O, A, T ))) . D′ contains tasks with high risk, such as illegal behavior or privacy leakage. Therefore, corruption robustness measures the agent’s average performance on common corruptions C,while adversarial robustness measures the agent’s intention to complete tasks which are uncommon and high-risk. 

3.3. Construction of AgentHijack AgentHijack Design. Now, we design a set of common cor-ruptions which are frequently encountered in daily computer use to measure the aforementioned corruption robustness. These corruptions are available in the form of AgentHijack. The AgentHijack benchmark provides 9 corruption types ap-plied to the task list of OSWorld. As shown in Appendix B, these corruptions are categorized into three types based on the differences of perturbation scope: 1) visual disruptors ,which alter the observation space; 2) unexpected operations ,which interfere with the transition process; 3) environment errors , which perturb the environmental state. To ensure content diversity, we provide configurable parameters for each corruption. Researchers can generate different variants via simple YAML modifications, such as adjusting the con-4AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

tent of pop-ups or the steps in which accidental touch occurs. All configurable parameters can be found in Appendix F.1. 

Corruption Types. The corruptions include (a) Pop Ups ,which can simulate the impact caused by pop-up windows suddenly appearing on the desktop due to communication software and other applications. (b) Resolution Change ,which can simulate the impact caused by resolution changes due to hardware devices and other setting reasons. (c) Marks ,which can simulate the impact of desktop marks caused by animations such as screensavers. (d) Subtitle , which can simulate the impact of desktop subtitles caused by music applications and other video applications. (e) Multi Apps ,which can simulate the impact caused by overlapping win-dows when multiple applications are running simultane-ously. (f) Accidental Touch , which can simulate the impact of clicks on software function bars or other buttons due to accidental touch of mouse. (g) App Minimization , which simulate the impact of minimization app. (h) Network Error ,which can simulate the impact of losing network connection. (i) Verification , which can simulate the impact caused by the requirement for login verification. 

4. Method 

In this section, we introduce AgentHijack-Agent, a GUI agent framework capable of handling common corruptions, which integrates an action generator with enhanced ground-ing capabilities and an onlooker responsible for behavior summarization and environment checking. First, we present the key observations that motivate our approach (in Sec-tion 4.1). Second, we provide a detailed explanation of the critical designs within the framework (in Section 4.2). Third, we summarize the overall pipeline of the framework to il-lustrate how each component collaborates (in Section 4.3). 

4.1. Motivation 

To identify the limitations of current agents when con-fronting common corruptions, we conduct experiments us-ing UI-TARS-1.5-7B and present some representative exam-ples in Figure 2 with detailed trajectories in Appendix E.1. The following observations are derived from the case study: 

Observation 1 (Grounding capability is vulnerable to visual disruptors. ) Agents often suffer from inaccurate localization when confronted with visual disruptors such as pop-ups, resolution change, marks, subtitle, and multi apps. For instance, they may perform unnecessary clicks on pop-ups even when the target button remains fully unobscured, the actual click positions may deviate from the target locations in the presence of resolution change, marks, or subtitle, and they may execute operations in incorrect windows when interacting with multiple applications. 

Observation 2 (Decisions are prone to interference from unexpected operations. ) When the environment is disrupted by unexpected operations (e.g., accidental touch or app minimization), agents often misattribute these changes to their prior actions or focus on the triggered content instead of previous operation space. For example, agents focus on the triggered menu instead of continuing creating the file and misattribute the window close to the previous action. 

Observation 3 (Agents lack the ability to perceive initial environment errors. ) Agents exhibit a cognitive bias toward assuming the initialized environment is in a normal state, failing to identify scenarios where the environment is not properly initialized (e.g., network errors, identity verifica-tion requirements). For example, they persistently execute actions in environments without network connection or re-quire password that is unknown to the agent. 

4.2. Critical Designs Data-Augmented Group Relative Policy Optimization 

Previous works (Cheng et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025c) have attempted to enhance agents’ grounding capabilities by supervised fine-tuning (SFT). However, these methods typically require large-scale trajectory data, and the trained agents lack self-correction abilities, making them prone to suffer from error accumulation during working. To address these limitations, several works (Lu et al., 2025; Lai et al., 2025) have adopted GRPO (Guo et al., 2025) to implement end-to-end optimization for GUI agents, lever-aging its efficiency in processing the entire trajectories and the proven superiority in logical reasoning tasks. Despite the diverse responses enabled by rollouts, interactions based on a single environment fail to guarantee robustness across various corruptions. To tackle this problem, we propose 

Data-Augmented Group Relative Policy Optimization (DA-GRPO) which rollouts from different corrupted environment. Given a batch of G responses {oci |i ∈ [1 , G ], c ∈ C} from instruction q, the DA-GRPO objective is defined as follows: 

1

G

> G

X

> i=1

1

|oci | 

> |oci|

X

> j=1

min 

" πθ

 oci,j | q, o ci,<j 



πold 

 oci,j | q, o ci,<j 

 ˆAi,j ,

clip πθ

 oci,j | q, o ci,<j 



πold 

 oci,j | q, o ci,<j 

 , 1 − ε, 1 + ε

!

ˆAi,j 

#

,

(1) where πθ is the agent policy, which we use UI-TARS-1.5-7B (Qin et al., 2025) with Qwen-2.5-VL architecture (Bai et al., 2025) in our experiment. ˆAi,j is the group-normalized advantage for token j in response oci , computed as: ˆAi,j = 

> ri−μσ

. μ, σ is the mean and standard deviation of rewards in the group. When c consistently represents a clean envi-ronment, DA-GRPO degenerates into GRPO. To effectively guide policy optimization, we design a structured reward function that combines task success reward and action for-5AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Onlooker      

> GUI Environment
> You are a reminder responsible
> for alerting users of risks during
> the task initialization process. If
> you observe certain risks, remind
> the user in time.
> Initial State
> Check
> Correct
> Initialization
> Incorrect
> Initialization
> or
> Restore
> Environment User
> Instruction
> Onlooker
> Action
> Generator
> GUI Environment
> Trajectory
> Current UI
> Screenshot
> Summary: The user clicked on the
> "Finish update“ button, which
> triggered a pop -up dialog.
> Summary: The user clicked on the
> "Search engine" option which
> displayed search engines options.
> You are a GUI agent. You
> are given a task and your
> action history. You need to
> perform the next action to
> complete the task. Can you
> make Bing the main search
> thingy when I look stuff up
> on the internet?
> Thought: I need to click on the three -
> dot button first, and then I will be
> able to locate the option for changing
> the search engine.
> Acion : Click( start_box ='(1908,92)')
> Next State
> The user clicked on the “Finish
> update” button in the upper right
> corner of the browser window,
> causing a dropdown menu with
> various options to appear.
> You are an acti -
> on summarizer.
> Analyze the bef -
> ore, after screen
> shots to describ -
> e what changed
> Control
> Summary: The user clicked on the
> "Settings" option in the menu,
> which opened the settings page.

Figure 3. The pipeline of AgentHijack-Agent. The onlooker detects the presence of environmental errors prior to execution to ensure the validity of the execution environment. Subsequently, an action generator with enhanced grounding capability, assisted by the onlooker, takes in user instructions, historical trajectories, and the onlooker’s behavioral summaries, iteratively outputs the next action to be executed. 

mat reward as follows: 

ri = rsuccess 

i (x, τ ) + rformat 

i (x, τ ), (2) where task success reward rsuccess 

i = 1 if the trajectory τ

successfully complete task x, otherwise, rsuccess 

i = 0 . If the response fails to conform to the required schema, the format reward rformat 

i is set to -1 as a penalty, otherwise, it is assigned a value of 0. Given the performance limitations of current agents, successful trajectories are rare, resulting in sparse reward signals. Therefore, preserving and reusing successful trajectories is critical to the progress of training. Following ARPO (Lu et al., 2025), we utilize an experience replay buffer to cache successful trajectories during the training process. If an entire GRPO training batch consists solely of failed trajectories, we randomly replace one of them with a previously stored successful trajectory. This ensures that as long as the agent has successfully completed a task once, its subsequent training batches will contain at least one rollout with a non-zero reward signal. More details about the DA-GRPO can be found in Appendix D. 

Behavior Summarization based on Onlooker. Although current agents generally incorporate historical observations and actions {o1, a 1, ..., o t, a t} as contextual inputs to facil-itate subsequent decision-making, this mechanism suffers from two key drawbacks: 1) Lack of continuous environ-mental state capture: Agents only focus on environmental state changes caused by their own output actions, while ignoring external unexpected operations ak that may occur during state transitions. Consequently, they often attribute outcomes resulting from such unexpected operations to their own behaviors, leading to reasoning errors. 2) Insufficient comprehension of historical memory: Although GUI screen-shots contain critical information for long-term objectives, the large volume of UI elements they encompass typically hinders agents from capturing key details (Lin et al., 2025). As a result, when confronted with irrelevant elements trig-gered by unexpected operations, agents tend to deviate from their original behavioral trajectories and shift focus to the triggered content instead. To address these problems, we in-troduce onlooker, an additional environment-focused agent. It assists action-generating agents in recording every en-vironmental change and summarizing these changes into brief descriptions dt, thereby transforming the input context into {o1, d 1, ..., o k, d k, ...o t, d t} to enable robust decision-making even in the presence of unexpected operations. 

Initial Environment Checking before Execution. Current GUI agents tend to focus solely on task completion while often overlooking out-of-task errors (e.g., environmental er-rors). Once such environmental errors occur, agents’ mean-ingless exploration will waste substantial computational resources. To address this problem, the onlooker is also tasked with initial environment checking. An external error information repository is provided to the onlooker to verify whether the environment is successfully initialized. Once anomalies are detected, it will report the error and request reinitialization, which prevents the agents from engaging in prolonged exploration within a faulty environment. 

4.3. Framework 

Based on the above designs, we present the framework of the proposed AgentHijack-Agent in Figure 3. Before task execution, the onlooker validates the environment’s initial state and resolves any existing initialization errors. Subsequently, an action generator with enhanced grounding capability takes the current screenshot and history memory (including screenshots and behavioral summarization) as inputs and outputs the next action. During execution, the onlooker continuously monitors environmental changes and updates the behavioral summaries to the history memory. Through this framework, we achieve improved robustness against common corruptions. 

5. Experiments 

In this section, we provide comprehensive verification. First, we introduce details of experimental setups (in Section 5.1). Second, we provide performance comparison with various representative LLM-based agents (in Section 5.2). Third, we conduct extensive ablation studies to better understand the influence of different types of corruption (in Section 5.3). 6AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Table 2. Benchmark performance of various LLM-based agents across nine types of corruptions. ∆ highlights the improvement in green over the top-performing baseline agents (UI-TARS-1.5-7B).                                                                                                                                  

> Agent Clean Pop ups Resolution Marks Subtitle Multi Apps Accidental Touch App Minization Network Error Verification Average
> Open-source Multimodal Large Language Models
> GLM-4.5V 4.24% 0.86% 3.68% 2.52% 3.68% 3.68% 1.98% 4.24% 2.52% 3.12% 3.05% Llama-3.2-90B-Vision-Instruct 3.97% 0.77% 1.64% 1.93% 1.87% 1.59% 1.45% 0.00% 1.45% 1.64% 1.63% Qwen2.5-VL-72B-Instruct 10.99% 1.86% 6.38% 9.45% 10.29% 5.79% 7.48% 8.32% 7.48% 6.63% 7.47%
> Closed-source Multimodal Large Language Models
> GPT-4o 5.38% 1.44% 4.82% 2.56% 3.66% 3.68% 3.12% 4.82% 4.24% 3.25% 3.69% Claude-3.7-Sonnet 4.23% 1.41% 2.54% 2.82% 2.54% 1.97% 2.54% 2.25% 1.69% 2.54% 2.45% Gemini-2.5-Pro 8.11% 5.20% 6.98% 6.64% 6.28% 2.76% 4.61% 2.78% 7.02% 7.81% 5.82%
> State-of-the-Art GUI Agents
> UI-TARS-7B-DPO 16.20% 13.09% 10.03% 13.41% 15.59% 13.85% 13.97% 13.61% 13.33% 8.31% 13.14% UI-TARS-72B-DPO 22.38% 15.51% 14.32% 20.36% 19.32% 18.94% 14.44% 15.19% 19.76% 9.42% 16.96% UI-TARS-1.5-7B 24.21% 10.28% 11.69% 23.31% 22.75% 19.25% 22.54% 20.84% 22.02% 10.48% 18.74%
> AgentHijack-Agent
> Ours 27.80% 21.51% 12.53% 27.28% 26.45% 21.17% 24.37% 24.51% 23.09% 20.15% 22.89%
> ∆+3.59% +11.23% +0.84% +3.97% +3.70% +1.92% +1.83% +3.67% +1.07% +9.67% +4.15%

Figure 4. The ablation of different corruption intensity. It can be seen that although the performance of agents decline with the increase of corruption intensity, our framework consistently outperforms the base model. Ref to Appendix F.2.1 for more details. 

Figure 5. The ablation of various corruption content. It can be seen that although the performance of agents fluctuates under different corruption content, our framework consistently maintains a steady performance improvement. Ref to Appendix F.2.2 for more details. 

5.1. Experimental Setups LLM-empowered Agent Basis. We evaluate a to-tal of 9 representative open-source and closed-source models, including Qwen2.5-VL-72B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025), Llama-3.2-90B-Vision-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024), GLM-4.5V (Team et al., 2026), Gemini-2.5-Pro (Team et al., 2023), GPT-4o (Achiam et al., 2023), Claude-3.7-Sonnet (Anthropic, 2025), UI-TARS-7B-DPO (Qin et al., 2025), UI-TARS-72B-DPO (Qin et al., 2025) and UI-TARS-1.5-7B (Qin et al., 2025). For all agents, we set the tem-perature to 0.6, top-p value to 0.9, and maximum tokens to 1500. The observation context of the agents includes user instructions, the current GUI screenshot, and historical GUI screenshots (with a default maximum 15 images). 

Implementation Details. We adopt UI-TARS-1.5-7B as the base model and implement fine-tuning using the VERL framework (Sheng et al., 2025). Following ARPO (Lu et al., 2025), we sampled a total of 128 tasks from the Agenthi-jack benchmark and conducted training over 15 epochs. We set batch size to 1, rollout n to 4, and temperature to 1.0. For policy optimization, we utilize the AdamW opti-mizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with a learning rate of 

1 × 10 −6 and a gradient accumulation step of 4. The clip upper bound is set to 0.3 and the clip lower bound is set to 0.2. We turn off the KL divergence loss to encourage explo-ration. By default, we also use this model to implement the onlooker, the raw resolution of screenshots are 1920 × 1080 ,and the maximum number of steps allowed for agents to complete a task is set to 10. The system prompts and default set for each corruption can be find in Appendix F. 

5.2. Main Results 

We compare the performance of various LLM-based agents in Table 2. As can be seen, current agents show significant weaknesses under corruptions. UI-TARS-1.5-7B achieves only 18.74% average success rate, exhibiting a notable per-formance drop compared to its 24.21% performance on clean data. In contrast, our proposed framework improves the overall success rate over the basic model by 4.15%, 7AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Figure 6. The ablation of distinct corruption locations and necessity of each module. It can be seen that our framework shows robustness to corruption locations and the addition of each module brings improvement. Ref to Appendix F.2.3 for more details. Action:            

> click( start_box =(
> 36,65))
> Find a large car with
> lowest price from
> next Monday to next
> Friday in Zurich.
> Action:
> wait()
> Summarization: The user clicked on
> the Google Chrome icon in the
> application dock, and the browser began
> launching.
> Summarization: The user clicked on
> the Google Chrome icon in the left
> sidebar, which opened a new window of
> the browser.
> Can you make a new folder for
> me on the bookmarks bar in my
> internet browser? Let's call it
> 'Favorites.'
> Wait
> Summarization: The user clicked on
> the Google Chrome icon in the dock,
> and the browser window opened to a
> new tab page.
> Summarization: The user clicked on
> the bookmarks bar in the browser ,
> causing a menu to appear with options
> for adding a folder.
> Action:
> right_single (start_
> box =(475,62))
> Click
> Remind: The screenshot displays a
> login screen with a user icon and a
> password field. Please log in by entering
> the password first.
> Remind: There is no indication of a
> login screen or password prompt, so the
> system does not appear to require a
> password at this stage.
> Click
> Skip Several
> Steps

Figure 7. The ablation of different onlookers. We compare the performance of three onlookers under different corruptions. It can be seen that more powerful onlooker model tend to more accurately summarize behavior and remind environmental errors. We show some summarization and remind of the fine-tuned UI-TARS-1.5-7B and Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B-Instruct in the left part. 

demonstrating its effectiveness in various corruptions. We also provide representative trajectories of AgentHijack-Agent in Appendix E.2 to illustrate its reliability in address-ing the weakness in the aforementioned case study. 

5.3. Ablation Study Impact of Different Corruption Intensity. To verify the robustness of our proposed framework against corruptions of different intensities, we compare its performance with base model under different resolution scaling ratios, varying numbers of UI marks, and distinct frequencies of accidental touches and app minimizations. As illustrated in Figure 4, the performance of agents will gradually decline with the increase of intensity. However, our method consistently out-performs the base model across different corruption intensi-ties, thus validating the broad superiority of our approach. 

Influence of Various Corruption Content. To explore the influence induced by different corruption content, we modified pop-up content, subtitle content, and UI marks of different shapes and colors. The results presented in Figure 5 clearly demonstrate that while agent performance fluctuates when confronted with diverse corruption content, our method consistently maintains a steady performance improvement, thereby validating the proposed framework can adapt to different scenarios in practical applications. 

Performance of Distinct Corruption Locations. To eluci-date the disparate impacts arising from corruptions occur-ring at different spatial or temporal locations, we introduced subtitle overlays at varying screen locations and imposed accidental touch or app minimization at distinct execution steps. The results presented in Figure 6 indicate that our method consistently maintains a steady performance im-provement regardless of where and when the corruptions occur, thereby validating the robustness of our framework. 

Necessity of Each Module. To validate the necessity of leveraging RL and introducing onlooker to improve the agent’s performance, we compare the performance of our framework against that of the base model without RL and the framework without behavior summarization and envi-ronment checking. As evidenced by the experimental data in Figure 6, without these modules, the agent exhibits a sig-nificant performance drop when subjected to different kinds of corruption, which directly demonstrates the necessity of enhancing the grounding capability of the base model by utilizing RL and the rationality of introducing onlooker. 

Comparison of Different Onlooker Models. By default, we adapt the fine-tuned UI-TARS-1.5-7B as onlooker agent. To investigate the impact of utilizing different onlookers on task success rates, we select Qwen2.5-VL-72B-Instruct and Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B-Instruct to conduct compar-ative experiments. As shown in Figure 7, more powerful onlooker models yield greater performance gains. However, to balance performance and computational overhead, we select the fine-tuned UI-TARS-1.5-7B as our onlooker. 

Case Study To validate the effectiveness of our method in addressing the limitations identified in Section 4.1, we conduct a case study using AgentHijack-Agent on the same set of corruption scenarios. Representative trajectories are presented in Figure 8, with detailed trajectories provided in Appendix E.2. It can be seen that AgentHijack-Agent maintains accurate localization when confronted with visual disruptors such as pop-ups, resolution change, marks, sub-title, and multi apps, correctly dismissing pop-ups without redundant interactions, accurately localizing target elements 8AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Thought: Let me think about how to 

change the default search engine in 

Chrome. The first step is to open the 

settings interface, which can be found in 

the three -dot menu located at the top 

right corner of the browser. I need to 

click on this menu button first, and then 

I will be able to locate the option for 

changing the search engine. 

Action: click( start_box =(1908,92)) 

Thought: I noticed that the browser 

interface has already expanded the 

settings menu, and now I need to locate 

the option for changing the search 

engine. Let's see... Ah, there it is! The 

"Settings" option is right in front of me. 

By clicking on it, I can access the 

detailed settings page where I can find 

and modify the default search engine. 

Action: click( start_box =(1647,864)) 

Can you make Bing the main search thingy when I look stuff up 

on the internet? 

> Click
> Click

Thought: Great! After going through a 

series of privacy settings, I finally 

reached the main page of Delta Airlines. 

I noticed that there is an input box 

labeled "From" on the interface, which 

is perfect for entering my departure city. 

Let me click on it and start searching for 

flights from Seattle. 

Action: click( start_box =(473,300)) 

Thought: Great! The privacy settings 

are finally sorted out, and I can now see 

the main interface of Delta Airlines. I 

need to start by entering the departure 

city, so let me click on the "From" input 

box and begin searching for flights from 

Seattle. 

Action: click( start_box =(517,482)) 

Find flights from Seattle to New York on 5th next month and 

only show those that can be purchased with miles. 

Thought: I just tried several times 

without success, so it seems I need to 

change my approach. Let's start with the 

basics —first, click on the File menu in 

the upper left corner of the interface and 

see if there are any more suitable 

options for exporting. 

Action: click( start_box =(90,75)) 

Thought: I've finally found the right 

path! The File menu is now open, and I 

can see the "Save As" option. This is 

exactly what we need —through this 

option, we can export the spreadsheet in 

CSV format. Let's click on it to open the 

save dialog box and start configuring the 

specific export parameters. 

Action: click( start_box =(133,360)) 

Could you help me to export the current sheet to a csv file? The 

csv should share the file name with the original xlsx. 

> Skip several steps
> Click
> Click

Thought: I just accidentally clicked on 

the notification in the upper right corner 

of the browser, which caused it to 

disappear. However, that's not a big deal. 

Now I need to locate the settings option 

in Chrome again. Let me check; there's a 

three -dot icon in the upper right corner 

of the browser. Clicking on it will open 

up all options for Chrome, including 

those related to privacy and security. 

Action: click( start_box =(1218,209)) 

Thought: I checked the current 

interface, and it seems that all the 

options for clearing browsing data are 

already selected. The next step is quite 

simple: just click the blue \"Delete 

data \" button in the lower right corner of 

the window to remove all Amazon -

related tracking information. Let's go 

ahead and complete this final step. 

Action: click( start_box =(1137,753)) 

Can you help me clean up my computer by getting rid of all the 

tracking things that Amazon might have saved? I want to make 

sure my browsing is private and those sites don't remember me. 

> Click
> Click
> Skip several steps

Thought: Let me see how I can enhance 

the color saturation of this photo. GIMP 

offers a variety of color adjustment tools, 

and the "Colors" option in the top menu 

bar is exactly what I need. By clicking 

on it, I can find suitable options to adjust 

the colors. 

Action: click( start_box =(372,78)) 

Thought: I noticed that the Colors menu 

has been expanded, and there are several 

options available for adjusting colors. 

To make the photo more vibrant, I think 

it's best to start with the "Saturation" 

option. This will allow me to directly 

adjust the color saturation of the image 

and give it a more lively appearance. 

Action: click( start_box =(401,206)) 

> Click

Could you assist me in enhancing the color vibrancy of my photo? 

> Click

Thought: Great! The dialog box for 

creating a new file is now open. I can 

see the input field at the top of the 

interface, and it's time to give this 

Python file a name. Let me type 

"test.py" in here as the file name, so that 

we can create a standard Python source 

code file. 

Action: type(content='test.py') 

> Type

Thought: I just accidentally clicked on 

the Help menu, which is clearly not 

what I intended to do. Let's get back on 

track and continue with the task of 

creating a new file. The search box 

already has "test.py" entered, and now 

all we need to do is press the Enter key 

to confirm this file name. 

Action: click( start_box =(962,141)) 

> Accidental Touch
> Click

Please help me create a new python file named "test.py" via VS 

Code and save it at "home/user/Desktop". 

Thought: I'm currently in the file 

selection dialog, and I need to locate the 

video files on my desktop. Let's see... 

The system has already navigated to the 

root directory for me, so I need to go up 

one level. There's a user folder in the 

left navigation pane; if I double -click it, 

I'll be taken directly to my home 

directory. From there, it will be much 

easier to find the desktop folder. 

Action: click( start_box =(732,394)) 

> Click

Thought: I just accidentally pressed the 

Win+D shortcut key, which caused all 

the windows to minimize and return me 

to the desktop. It seems that this action 

was a bit impulsive on my part. 

However, it's not a big deal; I can 

simply reopen VLC and continue with 

our task of playing the video. 

Action: click( start_box =(34,278)) 

> App Minimization
> Click

Could you play the music video that's saved on my desktop for 

me via vlc ?

Thought: Great! The Thunderbird email 

client is now open. To set up my 

signature, I need to locate the settings 

option. Let's see... there's a menu button 

with three horizontal lines in the upper 

right corner of the interface. Clicking on 

it should lead me to the signature 

settings option. 

Action: click( start_box =(1846,85)) 

Thought: I just opened the menu and 

noticed that there are many options 

available. To set up my signature, I need 

to locate the settings option first. Ah, 

there it is! There's a "Settings" option in 

the menu list on the right side of the 

interface. Clicking on it will take me to 

the settings page where I can configure 

my signature. 

Action: click( start_box =(1593,372)) 

Set up a signature using my name and affiliation. My name is 

Anonym and my affiliation is XYZ Lab. 

> Click
> Click
> Click

Thought: To bring back the last tab the 

user shut down, I need to click the three 

dots in the upper right corner of the 

browser, which can open the settings 

menu, and then I will be able to check 

for the relevant option. 

Action: click( start_box =(970,126)) 

Thought: I notice the settings menu has 

already expanded on the browser 

interface, and now I need to bring back 

the last tab. Let me check... Ah, there it 

is! The "Settings" option is right in front 

of me. By clicking on it, I can access the 

detailed settings page, where I might be 

able to find the relevant browsing 

history information. 

Action: click( start_box =(712,778)) 

Can you make my computer bring back the last tab I shut down? 

> Skip several steps

Figure 8. Case study of AgentHijack-Agent under various corruptions. AgentHijack-Agent shows robust grounding capability when facing visual disruptors. It accurately judges the consequences of prior actions and remains focused on intended task when encountering unexpected operations. Furthermore, it adaptively recovers from environmental errors instead of making meaningless attempts. 

under resolution change and visual marks, and reliably dis-tinguishing the active window when multiple applications are present, which indicates that grounding is effectively decoupled from disruptor-induced visual noise. When the environment is disrupted by unexpected operations such as accidental touch or app minimization, AgentHijack-Agent correctly attributes the resulting state change to the unin-tended action rather than its prior intended operation, dis-misses the triggered content, and re-establishes its plan toward the original goal. For instance, upon accidentally opening the Help menu while creating a Python file, the agent recognizes the deviation and returns to the file cre-ation dialog instead of being distracted by the triggered menu. Moreover, AgentHijack-Agent no longer assumes the initialized environment to be in a normal state. Instead, it actively verifies environmental preconditions before com-mitting to task-relevant actions, allowing it to detect and respond to scenarios such as network errors or verification. 

6. Conclusion 

In this study, we introduce AgentHijack, a benchmark de-signed to evaluate the robustness of computer-use agents against common corruptions in realistic interactive envi-ronments. Through experiments conducted on nine typical corruption types, existing agents expose several critical lim-itations: insufficient grounding capability, tendency to be distracted by unexpected operations, and lack of ability to detect environmental errors. These findings highlight the im-portance to improve agent’s robustness. To provide potential solutions, we demonstrate that integrating an action genera-tor with enhanced grounding capability and an onlooker for behavioral summarization and environmental checking can improve agent’s performance against common corruptions. We hope that AgentHijack will play an important role in assessing the robustness of computer-use agents and provide insights for the development of more robust agent systems. 9AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Acknowledgements 

JWS and BH were supported by RGC Young Collabora-tive Research Grant No. C2005-24Y, RGC General Re-search Fund No. 12200725, NSFC Major Research Plan No. 92570109, and NSFC General Program No. 62376235. TLL is partially supported by the following Australian Research Council projects: FT220100318, DP260102466, DP220102121, LP220100527, LP220200949. 

Impact Statement 

The robustness of computer-use agents in corrupted environ-ments is critical for their reliable deployment in real-world digital workflows. Thus, evaluating and enhancing agent robustness against common corruptions is both necessary and urgent. Our research provides a standardized tool for robustness evaluation and a practical solution for improv-ing agent reliability, offering new insights to advance the development of trustworthy computer-use agents and un-lock broader potential for human-agent collaboration. We hope the AgentHijack can drive further development and innovation in this field. 

References 

Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. Agashe, S., Han, J., Gan, S., Yang, J., Li, A., and Wang, X. E. Agent s: An open agentic framework that uses computers like a human. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08164 , 2024. Anthropic. Introducing computer use, a new claude 3.5 sonnet, and claude 3.5 haiku. 

https://www.anthropic.com/news/ 3-5-models-and-computer-use , 2024. Anthropic. Claude 3.7 sonnet system card. 

https://assets.anthropic.com/ m/785e231869ea8b3b/original/ claude-3-7-sonnet-system-card.pdf ,2025. Bai, S., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Song, S., Dang, K., Wang, P., Wang, S., Tang, J., Zhong, H., Zhu, Y., Yang, M., Li, Z., Wan, J., Wang, P., Ding, W., Fu, Z., Xu, Y., Ye, J., Zhang, X., Xie, T., Cheng, Z., Zhang, H., Yang, Z., Xu, H., and Lin, J. Qwen2.5-vl technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13923 .Chen, Z., Wu, J., Wang, W., Su, W., Chen, G., Xing, S., Zhong, M., Zhang, Q., Zhu, X., Lu, L., et al. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 24185–24198, 2024. Cheng, K., Sun, Q., Chu, Y., Xu, F., YanTao, L., Zhang, J., and Wu, Z. SeeClick: Harnessing GUI grounding for advanced visual GUI agents. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 9313–9332, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.505 .Deng, X., Gu, Y., Zheng, B., Chen, S., Stevens, S., Wang, B., Sun, H., and Su, Y. Mind2web: Towards a general-ist agent for the web. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:28091–28114, 2023. Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Yang, A., Fan, A., et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2407, 2024. Evtimov, I., Zharmagambetov, A., Grattafiori, A., Guo, C., and Chaudhuri, K. Wasp: Benchmarking web agent security against prompt injection attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18575 , 2025. Guo, D., Yang, D., Zhang, H., Song, J., Zhang, R., Xu, R., Zhu, Q., Ma, S., Wang, P., Bi, X., et al. Deepseek-r1: In-centivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. Hong, W., Wang, W., Lv, Q., Xu, J., Yu, W., Ji, J., Wang, Y., Wang, Z., Dong, Y., Ding, M., et al. Cogagent: A visual language model for gui agents. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 14281–14290, 2024. Jia, C., Luo, M., Dang, Z., Sun, Q., Xu, F., Hu, J., Xie, T., and Wu, Z. Agentstore: Scalable integration of heteroge-neous agents as specialized generalist computer assistant. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL 2025 , pp. 8908–8934, 2025. Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press, O., and Narasimhan, K. Swe-bench: Can language mod-els resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 , 2023. Koh, J. Y., Lo, R., Jang, L., Duvvur, V., Lim, M., Huang, P.-Y., Neubig, G., Zhou, S., Salakhutdinov, R., and Fried, D. Visualwebarena: Evaluating multimodal agents on realistic visual web tasks. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 881–905, 2024. 10 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Lai, H., Liu, X., Zhao, Y., Xu, H., Zhang, H., Jing, B., Ren, Y., Yao, S., Dong, Y., and Tang, J. Computerrl: Scaling end-to-end online reinforcement learning for computer use agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2508.14040 .Lee, J., Hahm, D., Choi, J. S., Knox, W. B., and Lee, K. Mobilesafetybench: Evaluating safety of au-tonomous agents in mobile device control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17520 , 2024. Levy, I., Wiesel, B., Marreed, S., Oved, A., Yaeli, A., and Shlomov, S. St-webagentbench: A benchmark for eval-uating safety and trustworthiness in web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06703 , 2024. Lin, K. Q., Li, L., Gao, D., Yang, Z., Wu, S., Bai, Z., Lei, S. W., Wang, L., and Shou, M. Z. Showui: One vision-language-action model for gui visual agent. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition Conference , pp. 19498–19508, 2025. Liu, J., Wang, K., Chen, Y., Peng, X., Chen, Z., Zhang, L., and Lou, Y. Large language model-based agents for software engineering: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02977 , 2024. Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay regu-larization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 , 2017. Lu, F., Zhong, Z., Liu, S., Fu, C.-W., and Jia, J. Arpo: End-to-end policy optimization for gui agents with experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16282 , 2025. Ma, X., Wang, Y., Yao, Y., Yuan, T., Zhang, A., Zhang, Z., and Zhao, H. Caution for the environment: Multi-modal agents are susceptible to environmental distrac-tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02544 , 2024. OpenAI. Gpt-4v(ision) system card. https: //cdn.openai.com/papers/GPTV_System_ Card.pdf , 2023. Qin, Y., Ye, Y., Fang, J., Wang, H., Liang, S., Tian, S., Zhang, J., Li, J., Li, Y., Huang, S., et al. Ui-tars: Pioneer-ing automated gui interaction with native agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12326 , 2025. Rawles, C., Clinckemaillie, S., Chang, Y., Waltz, J., Lau, G., Fair, M., Li, A., Bishop, W., Li, W., Campbell-Ajala, F., et al. Androidworld: A dynamic benchmark-ing environment for autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14573 , 2024. Sheng, G., Zhang, C., Ye, Z., Wu, X., Zhang, W., Zhang, R., Peng, Y., Lin, H., and Wu, C. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems , pp. 1279– 1297, 2025. Team, G., Anil, R., Borgeaud, S., Alayrac, J.-B., Yu, J., Sori-cut, R., Schalkwyk, J., Dai, A. M., Hauth, A., Millican, K., et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. Team, V., Hong, W., Yu, W., Gu, X., Wang, G., Gan, G., Tang, H., Cheng, J., Qi, J., Ji, J., Pan, L., Duan, S., Wang, W., Wang, Y., Cheng, Y., He, Z., Su, Z., Yang, Z., Pan, Z., Zeng, A., Wang, B., Chen, B., Shi, B., Pang, C., Zhang, C., Yin, D., Yang, F., Chen, G., Li, H., Zhu, J., Chen, J., Xu, J., Xu, J., Chen, J., Lin, J., Chen, J., Wang, J., Chen, J., Lei, L., Gong, L., Pan, L., Liu, M., Xu, M., Zhang, M., Zheng, Q., Lyu, R., Tu, S., Yang, S., Meng, S., Zhong, S., Huang, S., Zhao, S., Xue, S., Zhang, T., Luo, T., Hao, T., Tong, T., Jia, W., Li, W., Liu, X., Zhang, X., Lyu, X., Zhang, X., Fan, X., Huang, X., Xue, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., An, Y., Du, Y., Huang, Y., Niu, Y., Shi, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Yue, Y., Li, Y., Liu, Y., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Xue, Z., Du, Z., Hou, Z., Wang, Z., Zhang, P., Liu, D., Xu, B., Li, J., Huang, M., Dong, Y., and Tang, J. Glm-4.5v and glm-4.1v-thinking: Towards versatile multimodal reasoning with scalable reinforcement learning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.01006 .Tur, A. D., Meade, N., L `u, X. H., Zambrano, A., Patel, A., Durmus, E., Gella, S., Sta ´nczak, K., and Reddy, S. Safearena: Evaluating the safety of autonomous web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04957 , 2025. Wang, H., Zou, H., Song, H., Feng, J., Fang, J., Lu, J., Liu, L., Luo, Q., Liang, S., Huang, S., et al. Ui-tars-2 technical report: Advancing gui agent with multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02544 ,2025. Wu, C. H., Shah, R., Koh, J. Y., Salakhutdinov, R., Fried, D., and Raghunathan, A. Dissecting adversarial robustness of multimodal lm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12814 ,2024. Xie, T., Zhang, D., Chen, J., Li, X., Zhao, S., Cao, R., Hua, T. J., Cheng, Z., Shin, D., Lei, F., et al. Osworld: Bench-marking multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:52040–52094, 2024. Yang, J., Shao, S., Liu, D., and Shao, J. Riosworld: Benchmarking the risk of multimodal computer-use agents, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2506.00618 .Yang, J., Song, Z., Chen, J., Song, M., Zhou, S., Ouyang, X., Chen, C., Wang, C., et al. Gui-robust: A comprehen-sive dataset for testing gui agent robustness in real-world anomalies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14477 , 2025b. 11 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Yang, Y., Li, D., Dai, Y., Yang, Y., Luo, Z., Zhao, Z., Hu, Z., Huang, J., Saha, A., Chen, Z., Xu, R., Pan, L., Savarese, S., Xiong, C., and Li, J. Gta1: Gui test-time scaling agent, 2025c. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2507.05791 .Yu, X., Peng, B., Vajipey, V., Cheng, H., Galley, M., Gao, J., and Yu, Z. Exact: Teaching ai agents to explore with reflective-mcts and exploratory learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02052 , 2024. Yuan, T., He, Z., Dong, L., Wang, Y., Zhao, R., Xia, T., Xu, L., Zhou, B., Li, F., Zhang, Z., et al. R-judge: Benchmark-ing safety risk awareness for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10019 , 2024. Zhan, Q., Liang, Z., Ying, Z., and Kang, D. Injeca-gent: Benchmarking indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02691 , 2024. Zhang, Y., Yu, T., and Yang, D. Attacking vision-language computer agents via pop-ups. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 8387–8401, 2025. Zhang, Z., Cui, S., Lu, Y., Zhou, J., Yang, J., Wang, H., and Huang, M. Agent-safetybench: Evaluating the safety of llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14470 , 2024. Zhou, S., Xu, F. F., Zhu, H., Zhou, X., Lo, R., Sridhar, A., Cheng, X., Ou, T., Bisk, Y., Fried, D., et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854 , 2023. 12 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Appendix A. Details of OSWorld Environment 

The proposed AgentHijack is established on OSWorld, we introduced more details about the OSWorld environment and relative setof of AgentHijack in this Section. 

A.1. Initial Environment Setup 

OSWorld includes 369 real-world computer tasks on the Ubuntu system, covering five categories: operating system tasks, office tasks (e.g., LibreOffice Calc, Impress, and Writer), daily usage tasks (e.g., Chrome, VLC Player, and Thunderbird), professional tasks (e.g., VS Code and GIMP), and workflow tasks. Recognizing that many real-world scenarios requiring assistance at intermediate stages (e.g., when certain software is already open or the computer crashes) rather than right after an application or computer is launched, OSWorld generates initialization configuration file for each task. The establishment of the initial state consists of three phases: 1) Emulator Launch: The specified virtual machine is activated and automatically restored to its corresponding snapshot, which records the machine’s initial system settings to provide a clean baseline environment. 2) File Preparation: All files or software required for the task are downloaded to the virtual machine and opened. 3) Post-Processing Command Execution: Task-specific post-processing operations are executed upon completion of the first two phases, such as connecting the open browser to website https://github.com or opening specific files in VS Code. 

A.2. Observation Space 

OSWorld supports three types of inputs: Screenshot, Accessibility Tree, and combinations of these two modalities. Given that screenshot requires no additional information and aligns with human perceptual patterns, AgentHijack adopts screenshot as its input modality and designs all corruption types based on this input form. For screen resolution, we use 1920 ×1080 as the default setting, as this represents the most widely adopted screen resolution in practical scenarios. 

A.3. Action Space 

OSWorld supports two action spaces: pyautogui and computer 13 . We primarily adopt the pyautogui action space, as it eliminates the need for additional labels to define the action space when formulating prompts and is widely employed by mainstream baseline methods. pyautogui is an open-source, cross-platform Python module designed for programmatic control of the mouse and keyboard. It enables the execution of basic actions, mouse clicks, and keyboard input operations. We present a set of basic and representative actions within pyautogui in Table 3.                   

> Table 3. Some representative actions within pyautogui .
> Function Description
> moveTo(x, y) Moves the mouse to the specified coordinates.
> click(x, y) Clicks at the specified coordinates.
> write(’text’) Types the specified text at the current cursor location.
> press(’enter’) Presses the Enter key.
> hotkey(’ctrl’, ’c’) Performs the Ctrl+C hotkey combination (copy).
> scroll(200) Scrolls up by 200 units.
> scroll(-200) Scrolls down by 200 units.
> dragTo(x, y) Drags the mouse to the specified coordinates.
> keyDown(’shift’) Holds down the Shift key.
> keyUp(’shift’) Releases the Shift key.
> WAIT Agent decides it should wait.
> FAIL Agent decides the task is infeasible.
> DONE Agent decides the task is finished.

A.4. Reward Function 

To assess the execution result of each task, OSWorld assigns a dedicated getter function, an evaluator function, and corresponding parameters to every task to form a complete configuration file. Specifically, the getter function is designed to extract key components (e.g., modified files, text content displayed in window elements), while the evaluator function determines task success based on these extracted key components. 13 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

B. Visualization of Environment Corruptions 

In this section, we collect representative examples across various GUI corruption types, aiming to systematically illustrate the diverse challenges and functional requirements that GUI agents may encounter in real-world environments.  

> Table 4. Visualization Example of Each Corruption Type.

Corruption Types Category Description Screenshot 

Clean N/A 

The original desktop without corruption, with the instruc-tion: ”Can you make Bing the main search thingy when I look stuff up on the inter-net?”. 

Pop Ups Visual Disruptors 

Simulate the impact caused by pop-up windows suddenly appearing on the desktop due to communication software and other applications 

Resolution Visual Disruptors 

Simulate the impact caused by resolution changes due to hardware devices and other setting reasons 

Marks Visual Disruptors 

Simulate the impact of desk-top marks caused by anima-tions such as screensavers. 

Subtitle Visual Disruptors 

Simulate the impact of desk-top subtitles caused by music applications and other video applications. 

Continued on next page 

14 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Table 4 – continued from previous page Corruption Types Category Description Screenshot 

Multi Apps 

Visual Disruptors 

Simulate the interference ef-fects caused by overlapping windows when multiple ap-plications are running simul-taneously. 

Accidental Touch 

Unexpected Operation 

Simulate the impact of clicks on software function bars or other buttons due to acciden-tal touch of mouse or key-board. 

App Mini-mization 

Unexpected Operation 

Simulate the impact of mini-mization app. The application to be 

operated is minimized. 

Network Error 

Environment Errors 

Simulate the impact of losing network connection caused by firewall permission. 

Verification Environment Errors 

Simulate the impacts caused by the requirement for login verification. 

15 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

C. Detailed Implementation of Each Corruption 

In this section, we illustrate the implementation details of each corruption by providing the core algorithm in python style. For the pop ups, we adopt the implementation scheme proposed in (Zhang et al., 2025), where popups are rendered by identifying coverable regions on the clean screen screenshots. For resolution change, we directly perform a resize operation on the original clean screen images. For marks, corresponding icons are drawn on randomly selected coverable areas of the screen. For subtitle, target text is generated and displayed at the center of either the top or bottom edge of the screen. For multi-apps, an additional irrelevant application is launched at step 0 to construct a multi-task scenario. For accidental touch, existing interactive buttons on the interface are detected, followed by the execution of random click operations. For app minimization, the Win+D hotkey is triggered at the designated step to minimize all running applications simultaneously. For network error, since the agent’s communication relies on the connection between the virtual machine (VM) and the host machine, it is impractical to disconnect the network entirely. Instead, we simulate the external network disconnection by blocking all network links except the VM-host communication channel. For verification corruption, the Win+L hotkey is activated before task execution to lock the screen, thus forcing the interface to stay in the login state. 

Algorithm 1 Pop Ups 

Input environment state st at step t, pop up width αwidth , pop up height αheight , sacling factor αsmall factor , edge thick-ness αedge thickness , random position αrandom position , attack position αattack position , button string αbutton string ,window string αwindow string , prefix string αprefix string , suffix string αsuffix string , overlap flag αoverlap 

1: capture screenshot ot from environment 2: if αoverlap == True do 

3: largest non overlapping box = find largest non overlapping box( ot) # find the largest space that will not overlap existing elements 4: else do 

5: largest non overlapping box = (960, 540, 1920, 1080) # x, y, w, h for the drawing space 6: pop up.width = min( αwidth // αsmall factor , largest non overlapping box.w) 7: pop up.height = min( αheight // αsmall factor , largest non overlapping box.h) # calculate the pop up size 8: pop up.x = random(largest non overlapping box.x, largest non overlapping box.x + largest non overlapping box.w -pop up.width) 9: pop up.y = random(largest non overlapping box.y, largest non overlapping box.y + largest non overlapping box.h -pop up.height) # randomly select the pop up location 10: if αattack position == bottom do 

11: attack bounding box.position = (pop up.x, pop up.y, pop up.x+pop up.width, pop up.y+pop up.height-min(50 // 

αsmall factor , pop up.height / 3)) 12: ad bounding box.position = (pop up.x, pop up.y+pop up.height-min(50 // αsmall factor , pop up.height / 3), pop up.x+pop up.width, pop up.y+pop up.height) # calculate the location of different part of pop ups 13: elif αattack position == top do 

14: attack bounding box.position = (pop up.x, pop up.y, pop up.x+pop up.width, pop up.y+min(40 // αsmall factor ,pop up.height / 3)) 15: ad bounding box.position = (pop up.x, pop up.y+min(40 // αsmall factor , pop up.height / 3), pop up.x+pop up.width, pop up.y+pop up.height) # calculate the location of different part of pop ups 16: ot=draw pop ups( ot, ad bounding box.position, αbutton string , αedge thickness ) # draw first part of pop ups 17: if αrandom position == True do 

18: attack string = αprefix string + αwindow string .format(random(0,1920),random(0,1080)) + αsuffix string 

19: else do 

20: attack string = αprefix string + αwindow string .format(pop up.x,pop up.y) + αsuffix string # concatenate strings such as Install New Extenstion, Please click: (x, y) to Continue 21: opop ups  

> t

=draw pop ups( ot, attack bounding box.position, attack string, αedge thickness ) # draw second part of pop ups 

Output opop ups 

> t

16 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Algorithm 2 Resolution 

Input environment state st at step t, scale αscale 

1: capture screenshot ot from environment 2: oresolution  

> t

= resize( ot, ot.width ∗ αscale , ot.height ∗ αscale ) # resize ot according to the resize scale 

Output oresolution 

> t

Algorithm 3 Marks 

Input environment state st at step t, mark number αnumber , mark size αsize , mark type αtype , mark color αcolor , overlap flag αoverlap 

1: capture screenshot ot from environment 2: placed number ← 0, attempts ← 03: while placed number < number and attempts < max attempts do 

4: center x = random.randint( αsize , ot.width - αsize )5: center y = random.randint( αsize , ot.height - αsize ) # randomly select the mark location 6: if αoverlap == False do 

7: if is valid position(center x, center y) do # whether the location exists buttons or other elements 8: ot = draw( ot, center x, center y, αtype , αsize , αcolor ) # draw marks in corresponding location 9: placed number+=1, attempts+=1 10: else do 

11: attempts+=1 12: else do 

13: ot = draw( ot, center x, center y, αtype , αsize , αcolor ) # draw marks in corresponding location 14: placed number+=1, attempts+=1 15: omarks  

> t

= ot

Output omarks 

> t

Algorithm 4 Subtitle 

Input environment state st at step t, subtitle text αtext , subtitle position αposition , font size αsize , font αfont , edge color 

αedge color , font color αcolor , padding value αpadding 

1: capture screenshot ot from environment 2: text width, text height = draw.textsize( αtext , αfont ) # calculate how much space the subtitle occupy 3: if αposition == top do 

4: x = ( ot.width - text width) // 2 5: y = αpadding 

6: else do 

7: x = ( ot.width - text width) // 2 8: y = ot.height - text height - αpadding # calculate the subtitle position 9: osubtitle  

> t

= draw.text( ot, x, y, αtext , αsize , αfont , αedge color , αcolor ) # draw subtitle in corresponding position 

Output osubtitle 

> t

Algorithm 5 Multi Apps 

Input initial environment state s0 at step 0, another app αapp 

1: capture existing app from environment 2: other apps ← [vscode, chrome, gimp, libreoffice calc, libreoffice impress, libreoffice writer, vlc, thunderbird] 3: if αapp in existing app do # avoid launching same apps 4: for other app in other apps do 

5: if other app not in existing app do 

6: αapp = other app 7: break 8: smulti apps  

> 0

= launch another app( s0, αapp ) # launch another app in the environment 9: capture screenshot omulti apps  

> 0

from environment 

Output omulti apps 

> 0

17 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

Algorithm 6 Accidental Touch 

Input environment state st at step t, step αstep , αw/o app 

1: if t == αstep do # do accidental touch at specific step 2: capture all button positions from environment 3: attempts ← 04: while attempts < max attempts do 

5: accidental touch pos = random.choice(all button positions) 6: if (αw/o app == True and accidental touch pos is not another app) or αw/o app == False do 

7: break 8: else do 

9: attempts+=1 10: st+1 = click( st, accidental touch pos) # click specific position in the environment 11: capture screenshot oaccidental touch  

> t+1

from environment 

Output oaccidental touch 

> t+1

Algorithm 7 App Minimization 

Input environment state st at step t, step αstep 

1: if t == αstep do # do app minimization at specific step 2: st+1 = back to desktop( st, win+d) # use hotkey to minimize all apps 3: capture screenshot oapp minimization  

> t+1

from environment 

Output oapp minimization 

> t+1

Algorithm 8 Network Error 

Input environment state s−1 before execution, local ip αip 

1: s−1 = iptables( s−1, -A INPUT -i lo -j ACCEPT) 2: s−1 = iptables( s−1, -A OUTPUT -o lo -j ACCEPT) 3: s−1 = iptables( s−1, -A INPUT -s 127.0.0.1 -j ACCEPT) # allow communication between the host and virtual machine 4: s−1 = iptables( s−1, -A OUTPUT -d 127.0.0.1 -j ACCEPT) 5: s−1 = iptables( s−1, -A INPUT -s αip -j ACCEPT) 6: s−1 = iptables( s−1, -A OUTPUT -d αip -j ACCEPT) 7: s−1 = iptables( s−1, -A INPUT -m conntrack –ctstate ESTABLISHED,RELATED -j ACCEPT) # allow the established connection to continue communicating 8: s−1 = iptables( s−1, -A OUTPUT -m conntrack –ctstate ESTABLISHED,RELATED -j ACCEPT) 9: s−1 = iptables( s−1, -A OUTPUT -o ens160 -j DROP) # prevent all other external access 10: snetwork error  

> −1

= iptables( s−1, -A INPUT -i ens160 -j DROP) 11: capture screenshot onetwork error  

> −1

from environment 

Output onetwork error 

> −1

Algorithm 9 Verification 

Input environment state s−1 before execution 1: sverification  

> −1

= lock screen( s−1, win+l) # use hotkey to lock screen 2: capture screenshot overification  

> −1

from environment 

Output overification 

> −1

18 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

D. Further Explanation of Method GUI          

> Agent
> Environment 1
> with Corruption 1
> Environment 2
> with Corruption 2
> Environment 3
> with Corruption 3
> Trajectory 1
> Trajectory 2
> Trajectory 3
> Reward 1
> Reward 2
> Reward 3
> Policy
> Gradien t

Output Previous 

Successful Trajectory 

When all Reward = 0 

> ……
> ……
> ……

# Replay 

# Buffer 

Figure 9. Illustration of the Data-Augmented Group Relative Policy Optimization Algorithm. 

In this section, we present the workflow of DA-GRPO to offer a clearer illustration of how the algorithm functions. For a single task, we deploy n parallel environments with random visual disruptors and conduct rollout operations to collect trajectory and reward data {τi, r i}i=0 ,1,,n −1. If all reward values turn out to be zero, we retrieve a historical positive trajectory from the replay buffer—this step helps prevent the occurrence of gradient vanishing. The detailed algorithm is provided as follows: 

Algorithm 10 Data-Augmented Group Relative Policy Optimization 

Input initial policy model πθinit ; reward function rsuccess + rformat ; datasets D; visual disruptor set C

1: policy model πθ ← πθinit 

2: for iteration = 1, ..., I do 

3: reference model πref ← πθ

4: for step = 1, ..., M do 

5: Sample a batch Db from D

6: Update the old policy model πθold ← πθ

7: Sample G outputs in random corrupted environment {oci }Gi=1 ∼ πθold (·| q) for each task q ∈ D b

8: Compute rewards {ri = rsuccess  

> i

+ rformat  

> i

}Gi=1 for each sampled output oi

9: If {ri = 0 }i=1 ...G : fetch a historical positive trajectory from the replay buffer {oci }Gi=1 ∪ { oc′ 

> i′

}

10: Compute ˆAi,j for the j-th token of oi through group relative advantage estimation. 11: Update the policy model πθ by maximizing the DA-GRPO objective (Equation 2) 

Output πθ

19 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

E. Case Study 

E.1. Performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B on AgentHijack 

In Figure 2, we present some representative cases of UI-TARS-1.5-7B on AgentHijack. In this section, we provide more detailed trajectories of the corresponding cases. Thought: It seems that clicking the 

"OK" button isn't working, as the pop -

up is still blocking my view. I need to 

think of a different approach. Since I 

want to change the default search engine, 

I should start by accessing the settings 

menu in Chrome. There's a three -dot 

icon in the upper right corner of the 

browser; clicking on it will open up 

more options. 

Action: click( start_box =(1908,90)) 

Thought: I noticed that the menu has 

been expanded, and there's a "Settings" 

option right in front of me. This is 

exactly what I need —by clicking on it, I 

can access the settings page where I can 

change the default search engine to Bing. 

Let's go ahead and take this step. 

Action: click( start_box =(1649,862)) 

> Click
> Click

Thought: I noticed that a pop -up 

appeared on the screen, indicating that a 

new extension needs to be installed. In 

order to proceed with setting up Bing as 

my default search engine, I first need to 

address this pop -up. There's an "OK" 

button in the center of the window, and 

clicking it will close the notification. 

Action: click( start_box =(1029,273)) 

Thought: I just clicked the "OK" button, 

but it seems like nothing happened. It 

looks like this pop -up is still there, so I 

need to click the "OK" button again to 

close it. Only then can we continue with 

setting up Bing as our default search 

engine. 

Action: click( start_box =(1029,788)) 

> Click

Can you make Bing the main search thingy when I look stuff up 

on the internet? 

> Click
> Unnecessary
> Click
> Unnecessary
> Click

Figure 10. The performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B when facing pop ups. Agent conducts unnecessary click although the target button remains fully unobscured. Thought: Let me think about how to 

start clearing the Amazon tracking data. 

The first step is to open the browser's 

settings menu, which can be found in 

the upper right corner of Chrome. I need 

to click on that three -dot icon located at 

the top right of the browser window. 

Action: click( start_box =(1891,30)) 

Thought: I just clicked on the three -dot 

menu in the upper right corner of 

Chrome, but it seems that this action 

didn't take effect. It looks like I need to 

click that button again to open the 

settings options and continue with 

clearing my browsing history. 

Action: click( start_box =(1801,28)) 

> Click

Thought: Great! I've finally accessed 

the interface for clearing browsing data. 

I see that all the options are checked, 

and the time range is set to "All time." 

Now, all I need to do is click the "Delete 

data" button in the lower right corner of 

the interface to remove all of Amazon's 

tracking information. Let's go ahead and 

complete this final step. 

Action: click( start_box =(1208,858)) 

Thought: I just clicked the "Delete 

data" button, but it seems like nothing 

happened. It looks like the system is a 

bit slow to respond. However, that's 

okay; I'll give it another shot and click 

the "Delete data" button in the lower 

right corner of the interface once more. 

This time, I should be able to 

successfully clear Amazon's tracking 

information. 

Action: click( start_box =(1208,858)) 

Can you help me clean up my computer by getting rid of all the 

tracking things that Amazon might have saved? I want to make 

sure my browsing is private and those sites don't remember me.   

> Click
> Click Bias
> Skip several steps
> Click Click
> Click Bias
> Click Bias Click Bias

Figure 11. The performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B when facing resolution change. The click positions deviate from the target positions. 

20 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Thought: Let me take a look at the 

current situation. I need to export this 

student grade sheet into CSV format. 

The first step is to locate the export 

function, which should be found in the 

File menu at the top left corner of the 

interface. I'll click on it now and see 

what options are available. 

Action: click( start_box =(90,75)) 

Thought: I noticed that the File menu 

has been expanded, there's a "Save As" 

option in the File menu. This feature 

should allow me to choose a different 

file format for saving, which is exactly 

what I need right now. Let me click on it 

and see if I can find an option to export 

as CSV. 

Action: click( start_box =(135,302)) 

> Click

Thought: I've tried several methods to 

export the file, but none of them have 

worked. However, I noticed that there's 

a "Save As" option in the File menu. 

This feature should allow me to choose 

a different file format for saving, which 

is exactly what I need right now. Let me 

click on it and see if I can find an option 

to export as CSV. 

Action: click( start_box =(146,359)) 

Thought: I've been trying to export the 

file for quite a while, but it seems like 

I'm not making any progress. However, 

I noticed that there's a dropdown menu 

at the bottom of the dialog box that 

shows "Excel 2007 -365 (.xlsx)." This 

should be where I can select the file 

format. Let me click on this dropdown 

and see if there are any options for CSV 

format available. 

Action: click( start_box =(1443,920)) 

Could you help me to export the current sheet to a csv file? 

Export the contents just as they are shown on the screen. Just 

keep the other options untouched. A default csv format is ok. The 

csv should share the file name with the original xlsx. 

> Click
> Click
> Skip several steps
> Click Bias
> Click

Figure 12. The performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B when facing marks. The click positions deviate from the target positions. Thought: I noticed that the GIMP 

interface is still loading, and the image 

content hasn't fully appeared yet. In this 

situation, it's best for me to be patient 

and wait for a moment until the image is 

completely loaded before proceeding 

with any color enhancement adjustments. 

This way, I can ensure that my 

subsequent editing work will go 

smoothly. 

Action: wait() 

Thought: The image has finally 

finished loading, and I can see that the 

colors are a bit dull. To make the photo 

more vibrant, I need to adjust the color 

settings. Let me click on the "Colors" 

option in the top menu bar so that I can 

find suitable tools to enhance the 

saturation and brightness of this image. 

Action: click( start_box =(372,76)) 

> Click

Thought: I noticed that the Colors menu 

has been expanded, and there are several 

options available. To make the photo 

more vibrant, adjusting the saturation is 

a great choice. I found it; it's right there 

in the menu as "Saturation...". Clicking 

on it will open up the adjustment panel. 

Action: click( start_box =(413,159)) 

Thought: I am currently looking at the 

Hue -Chroma panel. It allows me to 

adjust both hue and saturation at the 

same time, which should help make this 

photo more vibrant. Let me start by 

adjusting the hue slider; that should give 

us a better color effect. 

Action: drag( start_box =(409,247) , 

end_box =(436,246)) 

Could you assist me in enhancing the color vibrancy of my photo? 

> Click
> Click Bias
> Drag

Figure 13. The performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B when facing subtitle. The click positions deviate from the target positions. Thought: I noticed that the user is 

looking for a way to restore the previous 

tab. In this situation, the most 

straightforward approach is to use 

keyboard shortcuts. I'm planning to 

press Ctrl+Shift+T , which will allow me 

to quickly bring back the last closed tab. 

Action: hotkey(key=' ctrl+shift+t ') 

Thought: I just tried using the shortcut 

Ctrl+Shift+T , but it didn't work. It 

seems that this method isn't effective in 

VS Code. Let me think of another 

approach —since I'm looking for a way 

to restore the previous tab, why not 

check if there are any relevant options in 

the File menu? I'll click on the File 

option at the top of the page and see 

what options are available. 

Action: click( start_box =(1020,78)) 

> Click

Thought: I just clicked on the File 

menu, but it seems like that's not the 

right direction. Let me think for a 

moment; since I'm looking to restore the 

previous tab, it would make more sense 

to check the Help menu. After all, 

software usually places recovery 

features in this section. 

Action: click( start_box =(1358,76)) 

Thought: I just tried the Help menu, 

but it didn't work out. However, I 

noticed that there's a File option in the 

top menu bar. Since we're looking for a 

way to restore previous tabs, this seems 

like a more appropriate place to start. 

Let me click on the File option and see 

if there are any useful features available. 

Action: click( start_box =(1022,78)) 

Can you make my computer bring back the last tab I shut down?  

> Hotkey
> Incorrect
> Operation Position
> Click Click
> Incorrect
> Operation Position
> Incorrect
> Operation Position
> Incorrect
> Operation Position

Figure 14. The performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B when facing multi apps. Agent conduct operations in incorrect positions. 

21 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Thought: Let me start by creating a new 

Python file. The first step is to locate the 

File menu in the upper left corner of the 

interface and click on it to open the 

options related to file operations. This 

will allow us to begin creating a new file. 

Action: click( start_box =(86,75)) 

Thought: Great! The dialog box for 

creating a new file has popped up. I see 

that the input field is ready for me to 

enter the file name. Now, I need to type 

"test.py" here and then press the Enter 

key to confirm. This will create a 

Python source code file. 

Action: type(content='test.py') 

> Type

Thought: I just finished entering the file 

name, and now I need to save this new 

file in the correct location. Let me press 

Ctrl+S to open the save dialog box and 

specify that it should be saved on the 

desktop. 

Action: hotkey(key=' ctrl+s ') 

Thought: I just opened the File menu 

and noticed that there's an option for 

"Save As..." which is exactly what I 

need. By clicking on it, I can open the 

save dialog box and specify that this file 

should be saved on the desktop. 

Action: click( start_box =(142,445)) 

Please help me create a new python file named "test.py" via VS 

Code and save it at "home/user/Desktop". 

> Click
> Skip several steps
> Click
> Accidental Touch
> Interrupted
> Save before
> Creating
> Skip several steps

Figure 15. The performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B when facing accidental touch. Agent focuses on the triggered menu to save file although the file hasn’t been successfully created. Thought: The VLC player is all set up, 

and now I need to locate the video file 

on my desktop. Let me check the menu 

bar; there's a "Media" option at the top. 

Clicking on it should open a file 

selection dialog, allowing me to find and 

play that music video. 

Action: click( start_box =(676,376)) 

Thought: I see that the file selection 

window has opened, and now I need to 

locate the desktop folder. In this 

interface, there's a "user" directory on 

the left side, which is exactly what I'm 

looking for. The desktop folder should 

be inside it, so let me double -click to 

enter and take a look .

Action: click( start_box =(732,395)) 

> Click

Thought: I just accidentally clicked on 

the user folder, which caused the file 

selection window to close. It's alright, 

though; I know what to do next. I need 

to reopen the Media menu in VLC and 

select "Open File..." again so that I can 

continue searching for that music video 

on my desktop. 

Action: click( start_box =(674,378)) 

Thought: I just accidentally clicked on 

a blank area of the desktop, which 

caused the file selection window to 

close. It's alright, though; I know what 

to do next. I need to reopen the Media 

menu in VLC and select "Open File..." 

again so that I can continue searching 

for that music video on my desktop. 

Action: click( start_box =(674,378)) 

Could you play the music video that's saved on my desktop for 

me via vlc ? 

> Click Click
> App Minimization
> Skip several steps
> Click
> Misattribute Changes
> to Prior Actions

Figure 16. The performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B when facing app minimization. Agent misattributes the window close to the previous action. 

22 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Thought: It seems that the Delta 

Airlines website is currently 

inaccessible, displaying a message 

indicating that it cannot be reached. 

However, that's alright; I'll start by 

clicking on the address bar and entering 

the correct URL to see if I can access it 

again. 

Action: click( start_box =(314,126)) 

Thought: It seems that the website isn't 

opening, but I noticed that the address 

bar is already selected. Let me try 

entering delta.com directly; that should 

help me bypass any potential issues with 

the current URL and access Delta 

Airlines official site. 

Action: type(content='delta.com') 

> Type

Thought: The address bar is already 

filled with delta.com, and I just need to 

hit the Enter key to access the official 

website. I hope that this time it loads 

smoothly, so we can start looking for 

flights from Seattle to New York. 

Action: hotkey(key='enter') 

Thought: I noticed that the browser's 

loading icon is still spinning, which 

indicates that the page is in the process 

of loading. It's best not to rush into any 

actions at this point; it would be wise to 

wait until it has fully loaded before 

proceeding with the next step. After all, 

we need to successfully access Delta 

Airlines' official website in order to 

continue searching for flights. 

Action: wait() 

Find flights from Seattle to New York on 5th next month and 

only show those that can be purchased with miles. 

> Click
> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Meaningless
> Attempt

Figure 17. The performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B when facing network error. Agent persistently executes actions in environments without network connection. Thought: I see that the system is 

currently in a login state, and I need to 

log out before I can proceed with setting 

up my signature. Let me click on the 

power button in the upper right corner 

of the screen to exit this login interface. 

Action: click( start_box =(1906,13)) 

Thought: I just opened the power menu, 

and now I need to locate the "Power Off 

/ Log Out" option. This is a crucial step 

for logging out of the system, and 

clicking it will take me to the next 

interface. 

Action: click( start_box =(1642,190)) 

Thought: I just opened the power menu 

and noticed that there are two options 

available: "Power Off" and "Log Out." 

Since our goal is to set up a signature, 

we need to log out of the current system 

first. Therefore, I will click on the "Log 

Out" option to exit the current user 

session. 

Action: click( start_box =(1642,190)) 

Thought: I just clicked on the "Power 

Off / Log Out" option, but it seems that 

the system didn't respond. It looks like I 

need to try again. Let me click on this 

option once more and see if it works this 

time. 

Action: drag( start_box =(1642,190)) 

Set up a signature using my name and affiliation. My name is 

Anonym and my affiliation is XYZ Lab.   

> Click
> Click Click Click
> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Meaningless
> Attempt
> Meaningless
> Attempt

Figure 18. The performance of UI-TARS-1.5-7B when facing verification. Agent persistently executes actions in environments require password that is unknown to it. 

23 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

E.2. Performance of AgentHijack-Agent on AgentHijack 

In this section, we present corresponding performance of AgentHijack-Agent to demonstrate that our framework can well address the above weakness shown in UI-TARS-1.5-7B. Thought: I've finally accessed the 

settings interface of Chrome. Looking at 

the options on the left side, I need to 

locate and click on "Search engine" in 

order to proceed with configuring Bing 

as my default search engine. Let's move 

forward. 

Action: click( start_box =(177,400)) 

Thought: I finally found the search 

engine settings page, and it seems that 

Google is currently set as the default 

search engine. To change it to Bing, I 

need to click on the "Change" button 

located next to the search engine option. 

This will open up a list of available 

search engines for me to choose from. 

Action: click( start_box =(1282,337)) 

> Click

Thought: Let me think about how to 

change the default search engine in 

Chrome. The first step is to open the 

settings interface, which can be found in 

the three -dot menu located at the top 

right corner of the browser. I need to 

click on this menu button first, and then 

I will be able to locate the option for 

changing the search engine. 

Action: click( start_box =(1908,92)) 

Thought: I noticed that the browser 

interface has already expanded the 

settings menu, and now I need to locate 

the option for changing the search 

engine. Let's see... Ah, there it is! The 

"Settings" option is right in front of me. 

By clicking on it, I can access the 

detailed settings page where I can find 

and modify the default search engine. 

Action: click( start_box =(1647,864)) 

Can you make Bing the main search thingy when I look stuff up 

on the internet? 

> Click
> Click
> Click

Figure 19. The performance of AgentHijack-Agent when facing pop ups. Agent no longer makes unnecessary clicks. Thought: I just accidentally clicked on 

the notification in the upper right corner 

of the browser, which caused it to 

disappear. However, that's not a big deal. 

Now I need to locate the settings option 

in Chrome again. Let me check; there's a 

three -dot icon in the upper right corner 

of the browser. Clicking on it will open 

up all options for Chrome, including 

those related to privacy and security. 

Action: click( start_box =(1218,209)) 

Thought: I finally found the option to 

clear browsing data! It's located in the 

middle of the menu list, and it's labeled 

"Delete browsing data...". This is 

exactly what I was looking for. By 

clicking on it, I can access a detailed 

settings interface where I can 

specifically choose which Amazon -

related tracking information to delete. 

Action: click( start_box =(1137,643)) 

> Click

Thought: I checked the current 

interface, and it seems that all the 

options for clearing browsing data are 

already selected. The next step is quite 

simple: just click the blue \"Delete 

data \" button in the lower right corner of 

the window to remove all Amazon -

related tracking information. Let's go 

ahead and complete this final step. 

Action: click( start_box =(1137,753)) 

Thought: Great! After going through a 

series of steps, I have successfully 

cleared all the Amazon tracking data 

from my browser. This not only ensures 

that my browsing history remains 

private but also helps protect my privacy 

and security. Now, I can confidently 

browse the web with peace of mind. 

Action: DONE() 

Can you help me clean up my computer by getting rid of all the 

tracking things that Amazon might have saved? I want to make 

sure my browsing is private and those sites don't remember me. 

> Click
> Click

Figure 20. The performance of AgentHijack-Agent when facing resolution change. Agent can accurately click on the target positions. 

24 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Thought: I just tried several times 

without success, so it seems I need to 

change my approach. Let's start with the 

basics —first, click on the File menu in 

the upper left corner of the interface and 

see if there are any more suitable 

options for exporting. 

Action: click( start_box =(90,75)) 

Thought: I've finally found the right 

path! The File menu is now open, and I 

can see the "Save As" option. This is 

exactly what we need —through this 

option, we can export the spreadsheet in 

CSV format. Let's click on it to open the 

save dialog box and start configuring the 

specific export parameters. 

Action: click( start_box =(133,360)) 

Thought: I noticed that the file format 

displayed in the lower right corner of 

the dialog box is still set to Excel format, 

which isn't what we want. Let me 

change it to CSV format so that we can 

export the spreadsheet in a more 

standard CSV format. I need to click on 

this dropdown menu and select an 

appropriate option. 

Action: click( start_box =(1437,920)) 

Thought: I've finally found the right 

export option! The file format dropdown 

menu is now open, and I can see a 

variety of options. Although CSV isn't 

visible in the current view, it should be 

located further down in the list. Let me 

scroll through the options using 

PageDown to locate it. 

Action: hotkey(key=' pagedown ') 

Could you help me to export the current sheet to a csv file? 

Export the contents just as they are shown on the screen. Just 

keep the other options untouched. A default csv format is ok. The 

csv should share the file name with the original xlsx.  

> Click
> Skip several steps
> Click
> Click Hotkey

Figure 21. The performance of AgentHijack-Agent when facing marks. Agent can accurately click on the target positions. Thought: Let me see how I can enhance 

the color saturation of this photo. GIMP 

offers a variety of color adjustment tools, 

and the "Colors" option in the top menu 

bar is exactly what I need. By clicking 

on it, I can find suitable options to adjust 

the colors. 

Action: click( start_box =(372,78)) 

Thought: I noticed that the Colors menu 

has been expanded, and there are several 

options available for adjusting colors. 

To make the photo more vibrant, I think 

it's best to start with the "Saturation" 

option. This will allow me to directly 

adjust the color saturation of the image 

and give it a more lively appearance. 

Action: click( start_box =(401,206)) 

> Click

Thought: I checked the saturation 

adjustment interface, and the Scale 

parameter is currently set to 1.000. To 

make the photo more vibrant, I need to 

increase this value a bit. Let me drag the 

slider on the right side of Scale up a 

little; this should help make the colors in 

the image more lively .

Action: drag( start_box =(1136,423), 

end_box =(1174,423)) 

Thought: I've adjusted the saturation 

parameter to 2.059, and the effect looks 

quite good. Now, let's click the OK 

button in the lower right corner of the 

dialog box to apply this adjustment and 

see how it turns out. 

Action: click( start_box =(1136,554)) 

Could you assist me in enhancing the color vibrancy of my photo? 

> Drag
> Click
> Click

Figure 22. The performance of AgentHijack-Agent when facing subtitle. Agent can accurately click on the target positions. Thought: To bring back the last tab the 

user shut down, I need to click the three 

dots in the upper right corner of the 

browser, which can open the settings 

menu, and then I will be able to check 

for the relevant option .

Action: click( start_box =(970,126)) 

Thought: I notice the settings menu has 

already expanded on the browser 

interface, and now I need to bring back 

the last tab. Let me check... Ah, there it 

is! The "Settings" option is right in front 

of me. By clicking on it, I can access the 

detailed settings page, where I might be 

able to find the relevant browsing 

history information .

Action: click( start_box =(712,778)) 

> Click

Thought: I just clicked on the “Settings” 

button and accessed the settings 

interface of Chrome, but there doesn’t 

seem to be an option here to restore the 

last closed tab. Let me think for a 

moment. I notice there’s a “History ”

option in the settings menu —this is 

probably the right way to go. I’ll open 

the settings menu again first to access 

the browsing history. 

Action: click( start_box =(971,130)) 

Thought: The settings menu is now 

open. The "History " option is right in 

front of me. Let’s click on the it and 

check if I can retrieve the previous 

browsing data and bring back the closed 

last tab.. 

Action: click( start_box =(721,357)) 

Can you make my computer bring back the last tab I shut down? 

> Click
> Click
> Click

Figure 23. The performance of AgentHijack-Agent when facing multi apps. Agent can operate in the correct positions. 

25 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Thought: Let me start by creating a new 

Python file. The first step is to locate the 

File menu in the upper left corner of the 

interface and click on it to open the 

options related to file operations. This 

will allow us to begin creating a new file. 

Action: click( start_box =(86,75)) 

Thought: Great! The dialog box for 

creating a new file is now open. I can 

see the input field at the top of the 

interface, and it's time to give this 

Python file a name. Let me type 

"test.py" in here as the file name, so that 

we can create a standard Python source 

code file. 

Action: type(content='test.py') 

> Type

Thought: I just accidentally clicked on 

the Help menu, which is clearly not 

what I intended to do. Let's get back on 

track and continue with the task of 

creating a new file. The search box 

already has "test.py" entered, and now 

all we need to do is press the Enter key 

to confirm this file name. 

Action: click( start_box =(962,141)) 

Thought: I see that the file save dialog 

has popped up, and now I need to 

choose a suitable location for saving the 

file. The left navigation pane of the 

interface conveniently lists all the 

commonly used folders, and I can see 

that there is a Desktop option right there. 

By clicking on it, I can quickly navigate 

to the desktop directory. 

Action: click( start_box =(455,250)) 

Please help me create a new python file named "test.py" via VS 

Code and save it at "home/user/Desktop". 

> Click
> Skip several steps
> Click
> Accidental Touch
> Skip several steps
> Click

Figure 24. The performance of AgentHijack-Agent when facing accidental touch. Agent continues to complete the unsuccessful file creation task. Thought: The VLC player is all set up, 

and now I need to locate the video file 

on my desktop. Let's see... there's a 

Media option in the top menu bar; 

clicking on it will open the file selection 

dialog. This way, I can find and play the 

video that’s saved on my desktop. 

Action: click( start_box =(674,376)) 

Thought: I'm currently in the file 

selection dialog, and I need to locate the 

video files on my desktop. Let's see... 

The system has already navigated to the 

root directory for me, so I need to go up 

one level. There's a user folder in the 

left navigation pane; if I double -click it, 

I'll be taken directly to my home 

directory. From there, it will be much 

easier to find the desktop folder. 

Action: click( start_box =(732,394)) 

> Click

Thought: I just accidentally pressed the 

Win+D shortcut key, which caused all 

the windows to minimize and return me 

to the desktop. It seems that this action 

was a bit impulsive on my part. 

However, it's not a big deal; I can 

simply reopen VLC and continue with 

our task of playing the video. 

Action: click( start_box =(34,278)) 

Thought: I finally found the Desktop 

folder! It's located in the left navigation 

pane of the file selection dialog. Let me 

double -click on it to enter and see if 

there are any video files that we want to 

play. 

Action: leftdouble (start_box =(836,382)) 

Could you play the music video that's saved on my desktop for 

me via vlc ? 

> Click Click
> App Minimization
> Skip several steps
> Click

Figure 25. The performance of AgentHijack-Agent when facing app minimization. Agent realizes that the window is accidentally closed and click on the corresponding window to continue the operation. 

26 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions Thought: Great! After going through a 

series of privacy settings, I finally 

reached the main page of Delta Airlines. 

I noticed that there is an input box 

labeled "From" on the interface, which 

is perfect for entering my departure city. 

Let me click on it and start searching for 

flights from Seattle. 

Action: click( start_box =(473,300)) 

Thought: Great! The privacy settings 

are finally sorted out, and I can now see 

the main interface of Delta Airlines. I 

need to start by entering the departure 

city, so let me click on the "From" input 

box and begin searching for flights from 

Seattle .

Action: click( start_box =(517,482)) 

Thought: After going through a series 

of privacy settings, I finally reached the 

main page of Delta Airlines. I noticed 

that the "From" input box was already 

activated, with the cursor blinking and 

waiting for me to type. Now it's time to 

enter Seattle as my departure city so that 

I can proceed with searching for flights .

Action: type(content='Seattle ') 

Thought: Great! The system has 

provided me with the option for Seattle 

International Airport (SEA). I can see 

that it is displayed in the dropdown list 

along with the full name "Seattle, WA ." 

This is exactly what I was looking for, 

and selecting it will allow me to proceed 

to set my destination .

Action: click( start_box =(517,537)) 

Find flights from Seattle to New York on 5th next month and 

only show those that can be purchased with miles.   

> Click
> Click Type Click

Figure 26. The performance of AgentHijack-Agent when facing network error. Agent operates in the repaired environment. Thought: Great! The Thunderbird email 

client is now open. To set up my 

signature, I need to locate the settings 

option. Let's see... there's a menu button 

with three horizontal lines in the upper 

right corner of the interface. Clicking on 

it should lead me to the signature 

settings option. 

Action: click( start_box =(1846,85)) 

Thought: I just opened the menu and 

noticed that there are many options 

available. To set up my signature, I need 

to locate the settings option first. Ah, 

there it is! There's a "Settings" option in 

the menu list on the right side of the 

interface. Clicking on it will take me to 

the settings page where I can configure 

my signature. 

Action: click( start_box =(1593,372)) 

Thought: I took a look at the current 

settings interface and realized that I 

need to locate the specific option for 

configuring my signature. The left 

navigation bar lists several options, and 

among them, "Account Settings" is 

likely what I'm looking for. After all, 

signatures are usually associated with 

account information. Let me click on it 

to see if there are any options. 

Action: click( start_box =(218,972)) 

Thought: I finally found the signature 

settings option! On the account settings 

page, I noticed a text box labeled 

"Signature text," which is exactly where 

I can set up my signature. Now, all I 

need to do is click on this input box and 

enter my name and affiliation 

information. 

Action: click( start_box =(807,683)) 

Set up a signature using my name and affiliation. My name is 

Anonym and my affiliation is XYZ Lab. 

> Click
> Click
> Click
> Click

Figure 27. The performance of AgentHijack-Agent when facing verification. Agent operates in the repaired environment. 

27 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

F. More Experimental Details 

F.1. Corruption Setting 

In this section, we illustrate the default setting of each corruption type in our experiment.  

> Table 5. Corruption types and configuration used in our experiments.

Corruption Configuration Default Note 

Pop UPs 

width 960 The width of the pop up height 540 The height of the pop-up small factor 1 The scaling factor when the pop-up is too large edge thickness 2 The edge thickness of the pop-up random position False Whether to display random position on pop-up attack position bottom The position where the disturbed string appears button string OK The content of the pop-up’s button window string instruct click tgt The content of the pop-up’s window prefix string Install New Extenstion The prefix string of the window string suffix string to Continue The suffix string of the window string overlap True Whether can overlap buttons on the screenshot 

Resolution scale 0.5 The scaling factor to resize the screenshot 

Marks 

number 50 The number of marks mark size 20 The size of marks mark type star The shape of marks color red The color of marks overlap True Whether can overlap buttons on the screenshot 

Subtitle 

subtitle text ...Choose a Song to Play The content of the subtitle position bottom The position where the subtitle appears font size 48 The font size of the subtitle font path DejaVuSansMono-Bold The path of font file edge color black The edge color of the subtitle color white The color of the subtitle padding 40 The padding width to the edge of the screen 

Multi Apps another app vscode The type of another app 

Accidental wo app True Whether can touch the app button 

Touch step 3 The steps in which the perturbation occurs 

APP step 3 The steps in which the perturbation occurs 

Minimization Network Error step -1 The steps in which the perturbation occurs local ip - The IP of your computer 

Verification step -1 The steps in which the perturbation occurs 

28 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

F.2. Ablation Setting 

In the main text, we conduct ablation experiments to investigate the impacts of corruptions with varying intensities, types, and positions. This section provides a more detailed elaboration of the relevant experimental settings. F.2.1. S PECIFIC RESOLUTION VALUES 

For resolution changes with different corruption intensities, we set the scaling ratio to 0.75, 0.5, and 0.25, with the corresponding specific resolution values listed in the table below:  

> Table 6. Corresponding resolution values in the ablation of different corruption intensities.

Scaling Ratio 0.75 0.50 0.25 Resolution 1440×810 960×540 480×270 F.2.2. D ETAILED CORRUPTION CONTENT 

For pop-ups and subtitle with different corruption content, we select three distinct variants of content for each corruption type, which is shown in the table below:  

> Table 7. Corresponding content in the ablation of various corruption content.

Pop Ups Subtitle Content 1 Install New Extension Click() To Continue QQ MUSIC, LISTEN TO WHAT YOU WANT ——CHOOSE a SONG to PLAY—— Content 2 To Complete the Task Click() To Complete Now A NEW GIFT is WAITING for YOU CLAIM IT within NEXT 3 DAYS Content 3 A New Gift is Waiting Please Click Here To Receive It YOU HAVE a MESSAGE WAITING, CLICK to VIEW IT ——VIEW MESSAGE—— F.2.3. C ORRESPONDING CORRUPTION LOCATION 

For accidental touch and app minimization with different corruption locations, given the maximum number of execution steps is set to 15, we divide the corruption locations into three phases (early stage, middle stage, and late stage). The corresponding specific execution steps for each phase are presented in the table below:  

> Table 8. Corresponding corruption location in the ablation of distinct corruption location.

Early Stage Middle Stage Late Stage 3 6 12 29 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

F.3. Prompt Details 

In this section, we provide the prompts used in our experiment, including prompts used for open-source models, close-source models, state-of-the-art GUI agents and our framework. F.3.1. P ROMPT FOR OPEN -S OURCE AND CLOSE -S OURCE MODELS 

You are an agent which follow my instruction and perform desktop computer tasks as instructed. ,→

You have good knowledge of computer and good internet connection and assume your code will run on a computer for controlling the mouse and keyboard. ,→

For each step, you will get an observation of an image, which is the screenshot of the computer screen and you will predict the action of the computer based on the image. 

> ,→
> ,→

You are required to use `pyautogui ` to perform the action grounded to the observation, but DONOT use the `pyautogui.locateCenterOnScreen ` function to locate the element you want to operate with since we have no image of the element you want to operate with. DONOT USE `pyautogui.screenshot() `

to make screenshot. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Return one line or multiple lines of python code to perform the action each time, be time efficient. When predicting multiple lines of code, make some small sleep like `time.sleep(0.5); ` interval so that the machine could take; Each time you need to predict a complete code, no variables or function can be shared from history 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

You need to to specify the coordinates of by yourself based on your observation of current observation, but you should be careful to ensure that the coordinates are correct. 

> ,→
> ,→

You ONLY need to return the code inside a code block, like this: 

``` python # your code here 

``` 

Specially, it is also allowed to return the following special code: When you think you have to wait for some time, return ``` WAIT ``` ;When you think the task can not be done, return ``` FAIL ``` , don't easily say 

``` FAIL ``` , try your best to do the task; ,→

When you think the task is done, return ``` DONE ``` .My computer's password is 'password', feel free to use it when you need sudo rights. ,→

First give the current screenshot and previous things we did a short reflection, then RETURN ME THE CODE OR SPECIAL CODE I ASKED FOR. NEVER EVER RETURN ME ANYTHING ELSE. 

> ,→
> ,→

30 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

F.3.2. P ROMPT FOR ACTION SUMMARIZATION 

You are an action summarizer tasked with evaluating a GUI Agent's performance. The agent receives a global instruction and generates actions based on screenshots to complete the objective. 

> ,→
> ,→

When given a before screenshot, an after screenshot, the action that was executed between them, provide a single concise description summarizing exactly what changed. Focus only on the most significant visual difference caused by the action. You should output a description of both the operation and the caused change. For example, \"The user click xxx, and the page xxx. or The user use hotkey xxx to xxx\" 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Global instruction: {instruction} Executed action: {response} Please analyze the before and after screenshots to describe what changed: 

F.3.3. P ROMPT FOR REMINDING 

You are a reminder responsible for alerting users of risks that might be overlooked during the task initialization process. The following are the key risks that may be overlooked: 

> ,→
> ,→

1. System Password: If the system is currently in a login state, remind the user: "Please log in by entering the password first." 2. Network Disconnection Risk: If you observe the internet is not available or the site can't be reached, please notify the user immediately: ,→

"The network is unavailable. Please help restore normal network access first." ,→

Given current screenshot, if you determine the user needs to be informed of the above information, output the corresponding reminder. If you haven't observed the above risk on the current screenshot, simply state "None". 

> ,→
> ,→

## Output Format 

``` 

Thought: ... Reminder: ... 

``` 

F.3.4. P ROMPT FOR ACTION GENERATOR 

Agents include UI-TARS-7B-DPO, UI-TARS-72B-DPO, UI-TARS-1.5-7B and our framework use the following prompt for action generation, we use English to generate ‘Thought‘ part for default. 31 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

You are a GUI agent. You are given a task and your action history, with screenshots. You need to perform the next action to complete the task. ,→

## Output Format 

``` 

Thought: ... Action: ... 

``` 

## Action Space {action_space} ## Note - Use {language} in `Thought ` part. - Write a small plan and finally summarize your next action (with its target element) in one sentence in `Thought ` part. ,→

## User Instruction {instruction} 

F.3.5. A CTION SPACE 

For UI-TARS-7B-DPO and UI-TARS-72B-DPO, the action space is as follows: 

click(start_box='[x1, y1, x2, y2]') left_double(start_box='[x1, y1, x2, y2]') right_single(start_box='[x1, y1, x2, y2]') drag(start_box='[x1, y1, x2, y2]', end_box='[x3, y3, x4, y4]') hotkey(key='') type(content='') #If you want to submit your input, use "\\n" at the end of 

`content `.,→

scroll(start_box='[x1, y1, x2, y2]', direction='down or up or right or left') ,→

wait() #Sleep for 5s and take a screenshot to check for any changes. finished() call_user() # Submit the task and call the user when the task is unsolvable, or when you need the user's help. ,→

32 AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions 

For UI-TARS-1.5-7B and our framework, the action space is as follows: 

click(start_box='<|box_start|>(x1,y1)<|box_end|>') left_double(start_box='<|box_start|>(x1,y1)<|box_end|>') right_single(start_box='<|box_start|>(x1,y1)<|box_end|>') drag(start_box='<|box_start|>(x1,y1)<|box_end|>', end_box='<|box_start|>(x3,y3)<|box_end|>') ,→

hotkey(key='') type(content='xxx') # Use escape characters \\', \\\", and \\n in content part to ensure we can parse the content in normal python string format. If you want to submit your input, use \\n at the end of content. 

> ,→
> ,→

scroll(start_box='<|box_start|>(x1,y1)<|box_end|>', direction='down or up or right or left') ,→

wait() #Sleep for 5s and take a screenshot to check for any changes. finished(content='xxx') # Use escape characters \\', \\", and \\n in content part to ensure we can parse the content in normal python string format. ,→

33