Title: Meta-Agent: From Task Descriptions to Verified Multi-Agent Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25233v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 01:54:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# Meta-Agent: From Task Descriptions to Verified Multi-Agent Systems 

Andy Xu 

Dartmouth College 

andy.xu.26@dartmouth.edu 

Yu-Wing Tai Dartmouth College 

yu-wing.tai@dartmouth.edu 

## Abstract 

AI agents are increasingly used to solve complex, multi-step tasks, but existing multi-agent frameworks remain brittle as workflows grow in scale and depth. Small errors at intermediate stages can propagate through agent interactions, while insuf-ficient grounding and weak verification mechanisms further limit reliability. We present Meta-Agent , a two-phase framework that automatically constructs and ex-ecutes specialized multi-agent systems from natural-language task descriptions. In the construction phase, a task planner decomposes a problem into a directed acyclic graph of agent specifications with explicit input/output contracts and verification criteria. A web search module grounds each specification with external evidence, and a code generation module produces system prompts and tool configurations. A construction-time verification stage then validates generated artifacts and triggers targeted regeneration when failures are detected. In the execution phase, a coordi-nator dispatches subtasks across the agent graph while execution-time verification gates intermediate outputs. We further introduce a three-level error attribution mechanism that distinguishes local, upstream, and structural failures, enabling targeted recovery strategies ranging from localized retries to partial re-execution and re-decomposition. We evaluate Meta-Agent across coding, contextual learning, and open-ended reasoning tasks. Experiments against strong multi-agent baselines and ablation studies demonstrate consistent improvements in task success rate, error recovery, and workflow stability. The results highlight the importance of tightly integrating planning, grounding, and verification for building reliable multi-agent systems. 

## 1 Introduction 

Real-world problems are inherently complex, underspecified, and multi-stage. Users often provide only partial or ambiguous task descriptions, leaving critical details, such as decomposition strategies, required knowledge sources, and validation criteria, unstated. Solving such tasks therefore requires not only executing instructions, but inferring how to structure the problem itself . This challenge is amplified in long-horizon settings, where errors made early in the process may remain undetected and propagate through subsequent steps, ultimately compromising the final outcome. Recent advances in large language model (LLM) agents have enabled systems that can plan, use tools, and execute multi-step workflows. Benchmarks such as AgentBench Liu et al. [2024] highlight that performance in these settings depends critically on decision-making and coordination rather than raw language modeling ability alone. To address increasing task complexity, a growing line of work explores multi-agent systems, where specialized agents collaborate to solve subtasks Hong et al. [2024], Zhang et al. [2025c]. However, existing approaches typically rely on fixed or manually designed agent structures, which assume that the decomposition of the task is known a priori. In practice, this assumption rarely holds: the optimal structure of a multi-agent system depends on the task itself, which must be inferred from incomplete user input. 

> 40th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2026).
> arXiv:2605.25233v1 [cs.AI] 24 May 2026

Figure 1: Comparison of agent paradigms. We contrast five approaches to constructing AI agents for solving tasks. Single Agent [Yao et al., 2023] uses one LLM that reasons and acts in a loop until completion. Hyperagent [Zhang et al., 2026b] augments a single agent with recursive self-evolution, iteratively refining its behavior across turns. Multi Agent [Hong et al., 2024] decomposes tasks via a planner that assigns subtasks to specialized workers, which coordinate and merge outputs. 

OpenClaw [Steinberger, 2026] is a personal assistant that learns online from interaction signals (user replies, tool outputs), with persistent memory and tool search. Meta Agent (ours) introduces a meta-level agent that constructs a task-specific multi-agent system at inference time: it both creates 

worker agents (solid arrows) and verifies them (dashed arrows). Unlike prior paradigms, it treats the agent system itself as a synthesize-and-validate artifact per task. This motivates a shift from designing agents to designing systems of agents . In this work, we introduce the concept of a meta-agent : an agent whose role is to construct other agents tailored to a given task. Rather than directly solving the problem, the meta-agent interprets a natural-language task description, decomposes it into a structured workflow, and generates a collection of specialized agents with well-defined roles, interfaces, and dependencies. This perspective reframes multi-agent systems as generated artifacts rather than fixed architectures, enabling adaptation to diverse and previously unseen tasks. Figure 1 illustrates how this paradigm differs from prior approaches. A central challenge in this paradigm is reliability. Automatically generated agent systems are particularly susceptible to cascading failures: errors in task decomposition, missing or incorrect grounding, and poorly specified intermediate outputs can silently propagate across agents. Existing approaches often rely on implicit self-reflection or post hoc correction, which are insufficient for long-horizon workflows where failures compound over time. We argue that reliable meta-agent systems require explicit, structured verification that is tightly integrated throughout both the construction and execution processes. To this end, we present Meta-Agent , a two-phase framework for transforming task descriptions into 

verified multi-agent systems. In the construction phase , the meta-agent decomposes the task into a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of agent specifications, each annotated with input/output contracts and verification criteria. Crucially, verification is introduced at construction time: generated agent specifications, prompts, and tool configurations are validated against these criteria, and failures trigger targeted regeneration of specific components rather than global retries. This process ensures that the resulting agent system is structurally sound before execution begins. In the execution phase , verification continues to play a central role. Each agent’s output is gated by task-specific validation checks, preventing erroneous intermediate results from propagating downstream. We further introduce a three-level error attribution mechanism that distinguishes local 

failures (within an agent), upstream failures (inherited from prior agents), and structural failures (arising from flawed task decomposition). This attribution enables targeted recovery strategies, including localized retries, partial re-execution, and, when necessary, re-construction of the agent graph. Together, these mechanisms form a closed-loop system in which planning, grounding, execution, and verification are tightly coupled. We evaluate Meta-Agent across diverse domains, including coding, contextual learning, and open-ended reasoning tasks. Compared to strong multi-agent baselines, our approach achieves consistent improvements in task success rate, robustness to intermediate errors, and stability in long-horizon 2Paradigm Structure Agent Construction Verification                   

> ReAct Yao et al. [2023] Fixed loop Fixed policy ×
> HyperAgent Zhang et al. [2026b] Single agent Self-evolving policy ×
> MetaGPT Hong et al. [2024] Predefined workflow Plan decomposition Local AutoGen Wu et al. [2023] Conversational graph Runtime orchestration Post-hoc OpenClaw Steinberger [2026] Lifelong agent Adaptive agent ×
> Meta-Agent (ours) Generated system System synthesis Construction + execution

Table 1: Comparison of agent paradigms. Prior work operates at different levels of agent design, ranging from fixed reasoning loops (ReAct), self-evolving single agents (HyperAgent), predefined multi-agent workflows (MetaGPT, AutoGen), and lifelong adaptive agents (OpenClaw). In contrast, Meta-Agent constructs a fully executable multi-agent system from task descriptions, explicitly synthesizing agent structure and enforcing unified verification across both construction and execution stages. workflows. Ablation studies demonstrate that the integration of verification, particularly during the construction phase, is critical to these gains. In summary, this work makes three main contributions: (1) we introduce the meta-agent paradigm for automatically generating task-specific multi-agent systems from natural-language descriptions; (2) we propose a unified framework that integrates planning, grounding, and verification across both construction and execution; and (3) we demonstrate that explicit verification loops and error attribution mechanisms are key to scaling agent systems reliably in complex, real-world settings. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Agent Paradigms and Multi-Agent Workflow Generation 

Recent advances in large language model (LLM) agents span a spectrum of paradigms, differing in how agent behavior is defined: from fixed reasoning loops, to self-evolving policies, to multi-agent coordination, and ultimately to persistent or automatically synthesized systems. We summarize this spectrum in Table 1. At the simplest level, single-agent frameworks such as ReAct Yao et al. [2023] interleave reasoning and action in a unified loop, treating the agent as a monolithic policy. A growing line of work studies 

self-improving agents , where the policy is recursively refined. HyperAgent-style systems Zhang et al. [2026b] enable agents to iteratively modify their own reasoning and improvement mechanisms, connecting to earlier ideas in recursive self-improvement such as Gödel Machines Zhang et al. [2025b], self-referential learning Kirsch and Schmidhuber [2022], Irie et al. [2022], and recent self-improving coding agents and recursive language models Robeyns et al. [2025], Zhang et al. [2025a]. This direction is further influenced by open-ended and evolutionary paradigms such as AI-GAs Clune [2019] and novelty search Lehman et al. [2022]. Multi-agent systems instead decompose tasks into specialized roles. MetaGPT Hong et al. [2024] adopts predefined workflows, while AutoGen Wu et al. [2023] and CAMEL Li et al. [2023a] enable flexible agent coordination. GPT-Swarm Zhuge et al. [2024] further models agent systems as optimizable graphs, allowing structural evolution. Recent work increasingly automates agent design. ADAS Hu et al. [2025] and Agentic Context Engineering Zhang et al. [2026c] jointly optimize prompts, tools, and workflows, while Prompt-Breeder Fernando et al. [2023] and Self-Taught Optimizer Zelikman et al. [2024] evolve optimization strategies. Systems such as OS-Copilot Wu et al. [2024] and Voyager Wang et al. [2023a] further demonstrate self-improvement through tool use and interaction. Persistent and adaptive agents extend this paradigm. OpenClaw Steinberger [2026] enables lifelong learning from interaction, while Evo-Memory Wei et al. [2025] and MemSkill Zhang et al. [2026a] evolve memory structures over time. Finally, large-scale agentic systems such as the AI Scientist Lu et al. [2024], SWE-agent-style sys-tems Yang et al. [2024], and AlphaEvolve Novikov et al. [2025] demonstrate end-to-end automation of research, coding, and algorithm discovery. 3Despite these advances, prior work operates at different abstraction levels, either fixed agents, self-modifying agents, or optimized multi-agent systems. In contrast, Meta-Agent synthesizes the entire agentic system, including structure, roles, dependencies, and verification, from task descriptions. 

2.2 Verification and Reliable Agent Systems 

As agent systems grow in complexity, ensuring reliability across long-horizon workflows has become a central challenge. Early approaches rely on self-reflection or heuristic retry mechanisms, which are often insufficient for preventing cascading errors. Recent works explore self-correction and critique-based refinement, where LLMs iteratively improve their outputs using feedback signals or tool-based critiques Chen et al. [2023], Gou et al. [2023]. However, such approaches lack formal guarantees and may still propagate hidden inconsistencies. Recent work integrates verification more explicitly into agent pipelines. VeriMAP Xu et al. [2025] embeds verification functions directly into multi-agent planning graphs, enabling runtime validation of intermediate outputs. VeriPlan Lee et al. [2025] introduces formal verification of LLM-generated plans by mapping constraints into temporal logic specifications and checking correctness against them. More broadly, formal methods from classical planning and verification, such as temporal logic and model checking Baier and Katoen [2008], Dixon et al. [2014], have been adapted to ensure correctness in autonomous systems. In parallel, several works propose learning-based or execution-based verification strategies. For example, execution-guided verification has been explored in code and reasoning tasks, where outputs are validated against runtime behavior or external tools Ni et al. [2023]. Step-aware verification further improves reasoning correctness by validating intermediate steps in multi-hop inference Li et al. [2023b]. Collaborative or multi-agent verification has also been studied, where multiple agents cross-check each other’s outputs to improve robustness Liang et al. [2024]. System-level reliability has also been studied through infrastructure-oriented designs. AgentGit Li et al. [2025] introduces version control mechanisms for agent workflows, enabling branching, rollback, and systematic comparison of execution trajectories. These approaches improve reproducibility and debugging of multi-agent systems. However, existing methods primarily verify fixed or already-instantiated agent structures. Meta-Agent differs by integrating verification at construction time, ensuring that agent specifications, tool configurations, and inter-agent dependencies are validated before execution, and enabling targeted reconstruction when failures occur. 

2.3 Contextual Learning and Reasoning Benchmarks 

Evaluating agent systems requires benchmarks that measure adaptation to contextual information and long-horizon reasoning. CL-Bench Dou et al. [2026] targets contextual learning across diverse settings. General reasoning benchmarks (MMLU Hendrycks et al. [2021a], BIG-Bench Hard Suzgun et al. [2022], GPQA Rein et al. [2023]) are increasingly saturated, while mathematical benchmarks such as GSM8K Cobbe et al. [2021b], MATH Hendrycks et al. [2021c], and Omni-MATH Gao et al. [2024] stress multi-step symbolic reasoning. Agent-oriented benchmarks such as AgentBench Liu et al. [2024] evaluate tool use and long-horizon decision-making, exposing the fragility of current systems under extended execution. These benchmarks largely test reasoning or tool use in isolation; Meta-Agent instead targets system-level correctness under explicit verification constraints. 

## 3 Method 

3.1 Overall Framework 

We propose Meta-Agent , a two-phase framework that transforms a natural-language task description into a verified multi-agent system and executes it under continuous validation. Given a task description 

T , the goal is to construct a set of specialized agents {a1, . . . , a n} together with a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G = ( V, E ) that defines their dependencies. Each agent is associated with an explicit input/output contract and a set of verification criteria, so that the resulting system is not only executable but also verifiable at every stage. 4Figure 2: Overview of the Meta-Agent. Phase 1 (left) transforms a task description into a DAG of verified agents through a pipeline consisting of prompt analysis, architecture planning, API research, code generation, and verification. Verification failures are typed and routed back to the responsible upstream stage. Phase 2 (right) executes the resulting multi-agent DAG under continuous verification. A coordinator dispatches agents, an in-memory context store routes intermediate outputs, and typed error attribution distinguishes local, upstream, and structural failures to determine the corrective action. As illustrated in Figure 2, the framework consists of a construction phase followed by an execution phase . In the construction phase, the system compiles the task description T into a complete specification of a multi-agent system. This process begins by parsing T into a structured representation that captures the task goal, constraints, and relevant context. Based on this representation, a planner decomposes the task into a small number of subtasks and organizes them into a DAG. For each node in the graph, the system produces an agent specification that includes a role description, a tool interface, an input/output schema, and a set of verification criteria. To ensure that each agent is grounded in external knowledge, the system augments these specifications with information retrieved from external sources, such as APIs or documents. The final step of the construction phase compiles each specification into an executable agent with a standardized interface. Importantly, the output of this phase is a fully specified and executable multi-agent system, rather than a high-level plan. In the execution phase, a coordinator executes the agent graph according to the DAG structure. Agents are dispatched when their dependencies are satisfied, and their outputs are stored and passed to downstream agents. Unlike conventional pipelines, execution is tightly coupled with verification: every intermediate output is validated before it is consumed. This design prevents errors from propagating across agents and enables robust execution in long-horizon tasks. A central design principle of Meta-Agent is that verification is treated as a first-class component of the system. Rather than applying validation only after execution, the framework integrates verification throughout both construction and execution. We formalize this mechanism as a unified verification loop in the next subsection. 

3.2 Verification Loop and Error Attribution 

The core contribution of Meta-Agent is a unified verification loop that detects, attributes, and corrects errors throughout the system lifecycle. Instead of a purely feed-forward pipeline, the framework operates as a closed loop: Generate → Verify → Attribute → Refine . (1) This loop is applied both during agent construction and during execution, ensuring that errors are identified early and corrected with minimal cost. 

Construction-time verification. During the construction phase, each generated agent is validated before being admitted into the system. Let σi denote the specification of agent ai, and let ˆai denote its generated implementation. The goal of construction-time verification is to ensure that ˆai satisfies the specification σi. This is achieved through two complementary checks. 5First, a static verification step ensures that the generated implementation is well-formed. This includes validating the code structure, checking that required interfaces are present, and confirming that the agent can be instantiated without runtime errors. Second, a behavioral verification step evaluates whether the agent behaves as intended. A verifier model simulates the execution of ˆai on representative inputs and checks whether the outputs satisfy the declared input/output contract and behavioral assertions. Crucially, verification does not produce a binary decision alone. Instead, it returns a typed failure signal that identifies the source of the error. We define a failure type f ∈ F , where F includes categories such as specification mismatch, grounding failure, and contract violation. Each failure type is associated with a specific upstream stage. For example, a grounding failure triggers a re-execution of the knowledge retrieval stage, while a contract violation triggers a revision of the task decomposition. This typed routing allows the system to correct errors locally without recomputing the entire pipeline. 

Execution-time verification. Verification continues during execution to ensure that intermediate results remain valid. Let yi denote the output of agent ai, and let Ci denote its verification criteria. Before yi is passed to downstream agents, a verifier checks whether 

yi ∈ C i, (2) where Ci encodes schema constraints, behavioral assertions, and forbidden patterns. If the output fails verification, it is not propagated further, and the system initiates a recovery process. 

Typed error attribution. To enable efficient recovery, Meta-Agent introduces a three-level error attribution mechanism. Given a failure at agent ai, the system classifies the error into one of three categories. A local error occurs when ai produces an incorrect output despite receiving correct inputs. In this case, the system retries the same agent with additional feedback from the verifier. An upstream error 

occurs when the failure originates from one of the dependencies of ai. The system identifies the responsible upstream agent and re-executes it before retrying ai. A structural error indicates that the task decomposition itself is flawed, for example due to an incorrect input/output contract. In this case, the system escalates to the construction phase and reconstructs the affected part of the agent graph. This attribution mechanism ensures that the cost of recovery scales with the locality of the error. Most failures can be resolved through local retries, while more expensive operations such as re-planning are invoked only when necessary. This design prevents cascading failures and significantly improves robustness in long-horizon workflows. 

3.3 Running Example 

We illustrate Meta-Agent end-to-end on a function-completion task (full pipeline trace and additional running examples in Appendix A, B and C). 

Construction phase. Given a task description T asking the system to complete Python functions from a signature and docstring, the Meta-Agent compiles T into a structured intent (goal, domain, constraints, task-category examples retrieved via web search). The swarm planner decomposes the task into four specialist agents in a DAG: (1) a specification analyst that parses signature and docstring into parameter types, behavioral rules, edge cases, and resolved ambiguities; (2) a strategy planner 

that selects an algorithm, data structures, and edge-case handling plan; (3) a code synthesizer that emits the implementation as a single fenced block; and (4) a code verifier that audits the output and emits a PASS /FAIL verdict. Each agent has an explicit I/O contract: the synthesizer’s, for instance, requires the exact input signature, verbatim docstring, and a guard clause for every planned edge case. Construction-time verification catches adherence failures and triggers regeneration before execution. 

Execution phase. At runtime, the coordinator runs the four agents in topological order. For the function: 

def has_close_elements(numbers: List[float], threshold: float) -> bool: """Check if any two numbers in the list are closer than the given threshold.""" 

6the analyst extracts implied edge cases (empty list, single element, zero threshold) and the rule 

“return True if any pair distance < threshold” . The planner selects nested pairwise comparison with early returns; the synthesizer produces the implementation; the verifier confirms signature match, verbatim docstring, edge-case coverage, and no third-party imports. The verified code runs against hidden unit tests in a sandbox. 

Error attribution and recovery. Failures are localized via the three-way classification. If the synthesizer uses ≤ instead of < because the analyst never flagged the strict inequality, the error is upstream and the analyst is re-run with feedback; if the analyst flagged it but the synthesizer ignored it, the synthesizer retries locally; if the planner selected an incompatible algorithm (e.g., sorting that destroys pair ordering), the failure is a contract violation and the planner is re-invoked; and if no existing agent could plausibly resolve the issue, the failure is structural and the coordinator re-plans the relevant subgraph. This example shows how Meta-Agent unifies planning, decomposition, execution, and verification in one pipeline, with construction-time verification preventing cascading failures. 

3.4 Design Choices and Implementation Details 

We highlight a small number of key design choices that are critical to the effectiveness of Meta-Agent. These choices focus on improving reliability and enabling efficient error recovery in multi-agent systems. 

Design-time grounding. We perform knowledge grounding during the construction phase rather than at execution time. External information, such as APIs and reference documents, is retrieved before agent generation and incorporated into the agent specification. This ensures that each agent is built with access to the required knowledge, reducing ambiguity during execution and lowering the likelihood of verification failures caused by missing or incorrect information. 

Verification-driven refinement. Verification is tightly integrated into the generation process. When a failure is detected, the verifier produces structured feedback that is used to guide the next generation attempt. This creates a refinement loop in which agents are iteratively improved until they satisfy their specifications. In practice, this significantly reduces misalignment between planned behavior and actual implementation. 

Typed error attribution for localized recovery. We adopt a structured error attribution mechanism that classifies failures into local, upstream, and structural categories (Section 3.2). This allows the system to apply targeted corrections, such as retrying a single agent or re-executing a dependency, instead of restarting the entire pipeline. As a result, the cost of recovery scales with the scope of the error. 

Trade-off between verification cost and robustness. Verification introduces additional compu-tational overhead, since each intermediate result must be validated before propagation. However, this cost is offset by improved robustness: early detection of errors prevents cascading failures in long-horizon workflows. Empirically, we find that this trade-off leads to more stable execution and higher task success rates. These design choices work together to ensure that Meta-Agent remains both reliable and efficient when applied to complex, multi-step tasks. 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Benchmarks. We evaluate Meta-Agent on six benchmarks across three categories, following the protocol of AFlow Zhang et al. [2025d] for benchmark selection, sample sizes, and metrics. For code generation, we use HumanEval Chen et al. [2021] (pass@1) and MBPP Austin et al. [2021] (pass@1). For mathematical reasoning, we use GSM8K Cobbe et al. [2021a] and MATH Hendrycks et al. [2021b] (Combinatorics & Probability, Number Theory, Pre-algebra, and Pre-calculus, solve rate). For reading comprehension, we use HotpotQA Yang et al. [2018] and DROP Dua et al. [2019]. 

Implementation. Meta-Agent’s components (planner, code generation module, verifier, and per-agent executors) can be instantiated with different language models. We use GPT-4o-mini for the 7Method DROP HumanEval HotpotQA MBPP GSM8K MATH Avg.                                                                

> IO 68.3 87.0 68.1 71.8 92.7 48.6 72.8 CoT Wei et al. [2022] 78.5 88.6 67.9 71.8 92.4 48.8 74.7 CoT-SC Wang et al. [2023b] 78.8 91.6 68.9 73.6 92.7 50.4 76.0 MedPrompt Nori et al. [2023] 78.0 91.6 68.3 73.6 90.0 50.0 75.3 MultiPersona Wang et al. [2024] 74.4 89.3 69.2 73.6 92.8 50.8 75.1 Self-Refine Madaan et al. [2023] 70.2 87.8 60.8 69.8 89.6 46.1 70.7 ADAS Hu et al. [2024] 76.6 82.4 64.5 53.4 90.8 35.4 67.2 AFlow Zhang et al. [2025d] 80.6 94.7 73.5 83.4 93.5 56.2 80.3
> Meta-Agent (ours) 82.7 96.0 69.5 84.6 93.7 69.6 82.7

Table 2: Comparison against baselines on six benchmarks. All methods use GPT-4o-mini and the test splits established by Zhang et al. [2025d]. Bold marks the best score in each column.                 

> Configuration DROP ∆
> Full Meta-Agent 82.7 —
> −Prompt analysis 80.3 −2.4
> −Planning 79.2 −3.5
> −API research 77.2 −5.5
> −Verification 75.6 −7.1

Table 3: Ablation of construction-phase components on DROP. Each row removes a single component from the full pipeline. ∆ is the change relative to the full system. main comparison (Section 4.2) to match AFlow’s executor, and additionally report Claude Sonnet 4.6 in Section 4.4. Verification is applied at both construction and execution time. The DAG structure, agent specifications, and tool configurations are generated per task; no templates are reused across benchmarks. We report single-run scores. 

Baselines. We compare against the seven baselines from AFlow’s main table Zhang et al. [2025d], all evaluated on the same splits with GPT-4o-mini: single-pass prompting (IO), structured prompting (CoT Wei et al. [2022], CoT-SC Wang et al. [2023b], MedPrompt Nori et al. [2023], MultiPer-sona Wang et al. [2024]), self-correction (Self-Refine Madaan et al. [2023]), and automated agent design (ADAS Hu et al. [2024] and AFlow). Baseline numbers are taken from Zhang et al. [2025d]. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 2 reports Meta-Agent’s performance against the AFlow baseline suite under a matched GPT-4o-mini executor. Meta-Agent achieves the highest score on five of six benchmarks, trailing AFlow only on HotpotQA. The average of 82.7 improves on AFlow (80.3) by 2.4 points and on the strongest non-agentic baseline, CoT-SC (76.0), by 6.7 points. The 2.4-point average improvement is driven by reasoning-heavy benchmarks. The largest gain over AFlow is on MATH (+13.4 points on a benchmark restricted to level-5 competition problems), which we attribute to the planner’s ability to allocate dedicated sub-agents for symbolic manipulation, intermediate verification, and answer extraction. DROP shows a similar pattern (+2.1 over AFlow, +3.9 over CoT-SC), consistent with the observation that constructed agent decompositions help most when the task admits a multi-stage solution structure. Code-generation gains are smaller (HumanEval +1.3, MBPP +1.2 over AFlow), partly reflecting ceiling effects under GPT-4o-mini; the gap to non-agentic baselines is much wider than the gap to AFlow, indicating that most of the benefit on code tasks comes from agentic structure itself. GSM8K is largely saturated, with all methods within 4.1 points of each other. 

4.3 Ablation Study 

To isolate the contribution of each construction-phase component, we ablate them one at a time on DROP under GPT-4o-mini (Table 3). Every component contributes positively. The two largest drops come from removing verification ( −7.1) and API research ( −5.5), supporting our central claim that construction-time verification and external grounding are load-bearing components rather than peripheral safeguards. 8Executor DROP HumanEval HotpotQA MBPP GSM8K MATH Avg.               

> GPT-4o-mini 82.7 96.0 69.5 84.6 93.7 69.6 82.7 Claude Sonnet 4.6 87.0 99.4 70.3 89.6 97.3 84.0 87.9

Table 4: Meta-Agent under two executor models, with the construction pipeline held fixed. Single-pass scores on the splits of Zhang et al. [2025d]. 

4.4 Executor Agnosticism 

Because the underlying language model is a configurable component, we re-ran Meta-Agent with Claude Sonnet 4.6 substituted for all components, holding the construction pipeline fixed; the average rose from 82.7 to 87.9 with no benchmark regressing (Table 4). This indicates that the constructed workflows transfer across executors without re-tuning, supporting the claim that Meta-Agent’s outputs are genuinely executor-agnostic rather than overfit to a particular model. 

4.5 Discussions 

Several consistent patterns emerge from the experiments. The largest gains appear on tasks requiring multi-stage reasoning and intermediate consistency checking, such as MATH and DROP, suggesting that Meta-Agent improves not only generation quality but also control over error propagation via explicit decomposition and verification. In contrast, improvements are smaller on saturated bench-marks like GSM8K and HumanEval, where single-pass generation is already strong. The ablation study further shows that verification is more critical than decomposition: removing planning reduces performance by 3.5 points on DROP, while removing verification leads to a larger 7.1-point drop, indicating that intermediate validation is a core component of reliable multi-agent systems. Finally, executor-agnostic results show that Meta-Agent improves system-level organization rather than relying on model-specific prompting, as replacing GPT-4o-mini with Claude Sonnet 4.6 improves performance across benchmarks without modifying workflows, indicating that the constructed agent graphs generalize across base models. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We presented Meta-Agent, a two-phase framework that transforms natural-language task descriptions into verified multi-agent systems by integrating planning, grounding, and verification across both construction and execution. A unified verification loop and three-level error attribution mechanism distinguish local, upstream, and structural failures, enabling targeted recovery whose cost scales with the locality of the error. Across six benchmarks, Meta-Agent outperforms a strong agent-design baseline on five of six tasks and improves the average by 2.4 points without iterative workflow optimisation, with the largest gains on reasoning-heavy tasks. The framework is also executor-agnostic: substituting Claude Sonnet 4.6 for GPT-4o-mini improves performance on every benchmark without re-tuning. Together, these results support treating the agent system itself as a synthesize-and-validate artifact rather than a fixed architecture. 

Limitations. The Meta-Agent in our framework generates multi-agent architectures fully automati-cally through reasoning-based construction and verification. In contrast, existing multi-agent systems are often manually designed by experts with strong in-domain priors and task-specific heuristics. As a result, although our automatically generated workflows are competitive, they may occasionally underperform expert-designed systems with richer domain knowledge and handcrafted structure. Nevertheless, our approach eliminates manual system design and enables scalable construction of multi-agent systems with strong performance across tasks. This fully automatic paradigm is particularly valuable in the face of dynamic real-world environments. In future work, we aim to incorporate lightweight domain-specific priors to further improve performance and narrow the gap with expert-designed systems. 

## References 

> Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis with large language models.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 , 2021.

9Christel Baier and Joost-Pieter Katoen. Principles of Model Checking . MIT Press, 2008. Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021. Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to self-debug. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128 , 2023. Jeff Clune. Ai-gas: Ai-generating algorithms, an alternate paradigm for producing general artificial intelligence. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10985 , 2019. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 , 2021a. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 , 2021b. Clare Dixon, Matt Webster, Joe Saunders, Michael Fisher, and Kerstin Dautenhahn. Temporal verification of a robotic assistant’s behaviours. In TAROS , 2014. Shihan Dou, Ming Zhang, Zhangyue Yin, Chenhao Huang, Yujiong Shen, Junzhe Wang, Jiayi Chen, Yuchen Ni, Junjie Ye, Cheng Zhang, Huaibing Xie, Jianglu Hu, Shaolei Wang, Weichao Wang, Yanling Xiao, Yiting Liu, Zenan Xu, Zhen Guo, Pluto Zhou, Tao Gui, Zuxuan Wu, Xipeng Qiu, Qi Zhang, Xuanjing Huang, Yu-Gang Jiang, Di Wang, and Shunyu Yao. Cl-bench: A benchmark for context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03587 , 2026. Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. DROP: A reading comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT) , pages 2368–2378, 2019. Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim Rocktäschel. Prompt-breeder: Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16797 , 2023. Bofei Gao, Feifan Song, Zhe Yang, Zefan Cai, Yibo Miao, Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Chenghao Ma, Liang Chen, Runxin Xu, Zhengyang Tang, Benyou Wang, Daoguang Zan, Shanghaoran Quan, Ge Zhang, Lei Sha, Yichang Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Tianyu Liu, and Baobao Chang. Omni-math: A universal olympiad level mathematic benchmark for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07985 , 2024. Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Yujiu Yang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. Critic: Large language models can self-correct with tool-interactive critiquing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11738 , 2023. Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Stein-hardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021a. Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2021b. Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03874 ,2021c. Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435 ,2024. Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435 ,2025. 

10 Kazuki Irie, Imanol Schlag, Róbert Csordás, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. A modern self-referential weight matrix that learns to modify itself. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2022. Louis Kirsch and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Eliminating meta optimization through self-referential meta learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14392 , 2022. Christine P. Lee, David Porfirio, Xinyu Jessica Wang, Kevin Chenkai Zhao, and Bilge Mutlu. VeriPlan: Integrating formal verification and LLMs into end-user planning. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI) , 2025. Joel Lehman, Jonathan Gordon, Shawn Jain, Kamal Ndousse, Cathy Yeh, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Evolution through large models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08896 , 2022. Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. CAMEL: Communicative agents for "mind" exploration of large language model society. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023a. Yang Li, Siqi Ping, Xiyu Chen, Xiaojian Qi, Zigan Wang, Ye Luo, and Xiaowei Zhang. Agentgit: A version con-trol framework for reliable and scalable llm-powered multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511:00628 ,2025. Yifei Li, Zeqi Lin, Shizhuo Zhang, Qiang Fu, Bei Chen, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. Making language models better reasoners with step-aware verifier. In ACL , 2023b. Zhenwen Liang, Ye Liu, Tong Niu, Xiangliang Zhang, Yingbo Zhou, and Semih Yavuz. Improving llm reasoning through scaling inference computation with collaborative verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05318 ,2024. Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 , 2024. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. Ansong Ni, Srinivasan Iyer, Dragomir Radev, Veselin Stoyanov, Wen-tau Yih, Sida Wang, and Xi Victoria Lin. Lever: Learning to verify language-to-code generation with execution. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2023. Harsha Nori, Yin Tat Lee, Sheng Zhang, Dean Carignan, Richard Edgar, Nicolo Fusi, Nicholas King, Jonathan Larson, Yuanzhi Li, Weishung Liu, et al. Can generalist foundation models outcompete special-purpose tuning? case study in medicine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16452 , 2023. Alexander Novikov, Ngân V ˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej Balog. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 ,2025. David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. GPQA: A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12022 , 2023. Maxime Robeyns, Martin Szummer, and Laurence Aitchison. SICA a self-improving coding agent. In ICLR Workshop on Scaling Self-Improving Foundation Models , 2025. Peter Steinberger. OpenClaw: Personal ai assistant. GitHub repository , 2026. URL https://github.com/ openclaw/openclaw .Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challenging big-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261 , 2022. 

11 Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023a. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023b. Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing the emergent cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-collaboration. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) , 2024. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. Tianxin Wei, Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Coleman, Zhankui He, Yuanchen Bei, Xuying Ning, Mengting Ai, Yunzhe Li, Jingrui He, Ed H. Chi, Chi Wang, Shuo Chen, Fernando Pereira, Wang-Cheng Kang, and Derek Zhiyuan Cheng. Evo-memory: Benchmarking llm agent test-time learning with self-evolving memory. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20857 , 2025. Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 , 2023. Zhiyong Wu, Chengcheng Han, Zichen Ding, Zhenmin Weng, Zhoumianze Liu, Shunyu Yao, Tao Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. Os-copilot: Towards generalist computer agents with self-improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07456 , 2024. Tianyang Xu, Dan Zhang, Kushan Mitra, and Estevam Hruschka. Verification-aware planning for multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17109 , 2025. John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15793 , 2024. Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-pher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 2369–2380, 2018. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Syner-gizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. Eric Zelikman, Eliana Lorch, Lester Mackey, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Self-taught optimizer (stop): Recursively self-improving code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02304 , 2024. Alex L. Zhang, Tim Kraska, and Omar Khattab. Recursive language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24601 ,2025a. Haozhen Zhang, Quanyu Long, Jianzhu Bao, Tao Feng, Weizhi Zhang, Haodong Yue, and Wenya Wang. Memskill: Learning and evolving memory skills for self-evolving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02474 ,2026a. Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin Gödel machine: Open-ended evolution of self-improving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22954 , 2025b. Jenny Zhang, Bingchen Zhao, Wannan Yang, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, Minqi Jiang, Sam Devlin, and Tatiana Shavrina. Hyperagents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19461 , 2026b. Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xiong-Hui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin Wu. AFlow: Automating agentic workflow generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025c. Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xiong-Hui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin Wu. AFLOW: Automat-ing agentic workflow generation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025d. 

12 Qizheng Zhang, Changran Hu, Shubhangi Upasani, Boyuan Ma, Fenglu Hong, Vamsidhar Kamanuru, Jay Rainton, Chen Wu, Mengmeng Ji, Hanchen Li, Urmish Thakker, James Zou, and Kunle Olukotun. Agentic context engineering: Evolving contexts for self-improving language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026c. Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. GPTSwarm: Language agents as optimizable graphs. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. 

13 Appendix A Pipeline Trace: Function Completion (Running Example) 

This appendix presents the complete pipeline trace for a multi-agent function completion system, showing the exact JSON outputs at each stage. The pipeline constructs a swarm of four collaborating agents from a single natural-language description. 

A.1 Input Task Description 

Listing 1: User prompt T submitted to the pipeline. 

Expert Python coding agent for function completion. Given a Python function signature with a docstring, complete the implementation. Reply with the full function definition (including the signature and docstring) inside a single python code block. Do not include example usage, tests, or explanatory prose. Focus on correctness, handling edge cases, and matching the docstring specification exactly. 

A.2 Stage 1: Prompt Analysis 

The prompt analysis stage extracts a structured intent representation, using web search to retrieve concrete examples spanning the task space. Listing 2: Stage 1 output: ParsedIntent (abbreviated). 

> {"goal": "Complete Python function implementations given only a signature and docstring, exactly matching the specification and handling all edge cases", "domain": "competitive programming / code generation", "tone": "precise, concise, code-only", "entities": [ "Python", "function signature", "docstring", "edge cases", "code block" ], "constraints": [ "Reply with only a single Python code block", "Do not include example usage, tests, or prose", "Match the docstring specification exactly", "Handle all edge cases (empty inputs, negatives, boundary values)", "Prioritize correctness over cleverness", "Do not import non-standard libraries" ], "task_examples": [ {"task_type": "straightforward list manipulation", "example": "def has_close_elements(numbers: List[float], threshold: float) -> bool: ...", "source_url": "https://evalscope.readthedocs.io/..." }, {"task_type": "medium algorithmic logic", "example": "def sort_third(l: List[int]) -> List[int]: ...", "source_url": "https://github.com/openai/human-eval/" }, ... // 5 additional categories omitted ]}

Duration: 122 s. Web search retrieved representative problems across seven task categories (list manipulation, algorithmic logic, string encoding, number theory, edge-case-heavy, recursive, and adversarial). 14 A.3 Stage 2: Swarm Architecture Planning 

In swarm mode, the planner decomposes the task into multiple specialist agents connected in a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Each agent has an explicit I/O contract and verification criteria. Listing 3: Stage 2 output: SwarmPlan — four-agent DAG. 

{"swarm_name": "Python Function Implementation Swarm", "summary": "Four specialist agents operate in a pipeline: (1) a Spec Analyst parses the docstring into an unambiguous specification, (2) a Strategy Planner selects the optimal algorithm, (3) a Code Synthesizer writes the implementation, and (4) a Code Verifier audits for correctness and edge-case safety.", "coordination_strategy": "Strict topological order. Phase 1: spec_analyst runs on raw input. Phase 2: strategy_planner begins after spec_analyst completes. Phase 3: code_synthesizer runs after both upstream agents. Phase 4: code_verifier audits the final output against all upstream artifacts.", "dag_edges": [ {"from_spec": "spec_analyst", "to_spec": "strategy_planner"}, {"from_spec": "spec_analyst", "to_spec": "code_synthesizer"}, {"from_spec": "spec_analyst", "to_spec": "code_verifier"}, {"from_spec": "strategy_planner", "to_spec": "code_synthesizer"}, {"from_spec": "strategy_planner", "to_spec": "code_verifier"}, {"from_spec": "code_synthesizer", "to_spec": "code_verifier"} ]}

Duration: 198 s. The planner produced four agent specs with a six-edge DAG. 

A.3.1 Agent Specifications 

Each agent in the swarm is defined by a spec with role, I/O contract, and verification criteria. We present all four specs below. 

Agent 1: Specification Analyst (root node, no dependencies): Listing 4: Agent spec: spec_analyst .

{"spec_id": "spec_analyst", "role": "Parses and structures the function signature and docstring into an unambiguous specification", "tools": ["web_search"], "dependencies": [], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "raw_signature": "str -- exact function def line", "raw_docstring": "str -- verbatim docstring" }, "output_schema": { "function_name": "str", "parameters": "list[dict] -- [{name, type_hint, description}]", "return_type": "str", "behavioral_rules": "list[str] -- explicit rules from the docstring", "edge_cases": "list[dict] -- [{case, expected_output, source}] where source is ’explicit’ or ’implied’", "resolved_ambiguities": "list[dict] -- resolved ambiguous cases with justification", "domain_category": "str -- e.g., ’dynamic_ programming’, ’string_manipulation’" }, "description": "Transforms raw signature+docstring into a fully structured, unambiguous specification" 

15 }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "Explicit edge cases in the docstring must appear verbatim in the edge_cases list with source=’explicit’", "Implicit edge cases (e.g., empty list for a list function) must be inferred with source=’implied’", "Ambiguous tie-breaking language must produce a resolved_ambiguities entry with a safe resolution" ], "required_tools": ["web_search"], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not produce any Python code or pseudocode", "Must not omit any explicitly stated edge case" ]}}

Agent 2: Strategy Planner (depends on spec_analyst ): Listing 5: Agent spec: strategy_planner .

{"spec_id": "strategy_planner", "role": "Selects the optimal algorithmic strategy and data structures for the implementation", "tools": ["web_search"], "dependencies": ["spec_analyst"], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "function_name": "str", "parameters": "list[dict]", "return_type": "str", "edge_cases": "list[dict]", "domain_category": "str", "behavioral_rules": "list[str]" }, "output_schema": { "chosen_algorithm": "str -- e.g., ’two-pointer’, ’hash map grouping’, ’DP tabulation’", "data_structures": "list[str] -- Python types used", "stdlib_imports": "list[str] -- required modules", "complexity": "dict -- {time: ’O(n)’, space: ’O(1)’}", "step_by_step_plan": "list[str] -- ordered implementation steps", "edge_case_handling_plan": "list[dict] -- [{case, strategy}] for every edge case" }, "description": "Maps the structured spec to a concrete, complexity-aware algorithmic plan" }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "Every edge case from spec_analyst must appear in edge_case_handling_plan with a non-empty strategy", "If domain_category=’dynamic_programming’, the plan must include memoization or tabulation steps", "Chosen algorithm must respect any stated complexity constraints" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not produce any Python code snippets", "Must not recommend an algorithm violating a complexity constraint" ]}}

Agent 3: Code Synthesizer (depends on spec_analyst , strategy_planner ): Listing 6: Agent spec: code_synthesizer .

{"spec_id": "code_synthesizer", "role": "Writes the complete, correct Python function implementation from the algorithmic plan", 

16 "tools": [], "dependencies": ["spec_analyst", "strategy_planner"], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "raw_signature": "str -- original signature verbatim", "raw_docstring": "str -- original docstring verbatim", "spec_document": "str -- from spec_analyst", "step_by_step_plan": "list[str]", "edge_case_handling_plan": "list[dict]", "stdlib_imports": "list[str]" }, "output_schema": { "python_code_block": "str -- single fenced code block containing imports + complete function definition", "synthesizer_notes": "str -- brief notes on implementation decisions" }, "description": "Produces the final Python function as a single code block, faithful to spec and strategy" }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "The output code block must begin with the exact raw_signature, character-for-character", "The docstring inside the code must match raw_docstring verbatim", "Every edge case in edge_case_handling_plan must be traceable to a guard clause or branch" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not include prose or markdown outside the single fenced code block", "Must not include example usage, test calls, or print statements outside the function body" ]}}

Agent 4: Code Verifier (depends on all three upstream agents): Listing 7: Agent spec: code_verifier .

{"spec_id": "code_verifier", "role": "Audits the synthesized implementation for correctness, spec compliance, and edge-case safety", "tools": ["web_search", "file_generator"], "dependencies": ["spec_analyst", "strategy_planner", "code_synthesizer"], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "python_code_block": "str -- from code_synthesizer", "spec_document": "str -- from spec_analyst", "behavioral_rules": "list[str]", "edge_cases": "list[dict]", "strategy_document": "str -- from strategy_planner", "synthesizer_notes": "str" }, "output_schema": { "verdict": "str -- ’PASS’ or ’FAIL’", "audit_report": "str -- markdown report listing every check and its result", "revision_request": "list[dict] -- if FAIL, specific changes required [{issue, fix, severity}]", "verified_code_block": "str -- the approved code block (unmodified from input if PASS)" }, "description": "Validates implementation against spec and strategy; approves or issues revision requests" }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "If the signature differs from raw_signature by even one character, verdict must be ’FAIL’", "If a guard for an explicit edge case is missing, verdict must be ’FAIL’", "If the code imports a third-party library, verdict must be ’FAIL’" ], 

17 "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not alter any line of the python_code_block", "Must not emit verdict=’PASS’ if any behavioral rule or explicit edge case is unhandled" ]}}

A.4 Stage 3: Directive-Driven API Research 

In swarm mode, the API research stage runs one targeted search per agent that needs external knowledge. Each search directive is derived from the agent’s spec. Listing 8: Stage 3 output: top API recommendations (abbreviated). 

{"recommendations": [ {"name": "OpenAI GPT-4o API (Code Generation)", "url": "https://platform.openai.com/docs/...", "description": "Flagship LLM backend for the code synthesis step.", "auth_method": "API key", "relevance_score": 1.0 }, {"name": "Anthropic Claude API (claude-opus-4)", "url": "https://platform.claude.com/docs/...", "description": "Top-tier alternative for code synthesis with 200K token context window.", "relevance_score": 0.95 }], "directive_results": [ {"directive_id": "spec_analyst", "spec_id": "spec_analyst", "research_summary": "web_search used to retrieve examples of docstring ambiguity patterns..." }, {"directive_id": "strategy_planner", "spec_id": "strategy_planner", "research_summary": "Searched for algorithm selection heuristics for competitive programming..." }]}

Duration: 474 s. The stage executed four search directives (one per agent spec) and returned ranked recommendations with provenance metadata. 

A.5 Stage 4 + 5: Per-Agent Code Generation and Verification 

Each agent spec is independently generated and verified through the code generation and verification loop. The system produces a Python module for each agent with the run(message, history) 

interface. Listing 9: Verification trace for spec_analyst (Pass 1 of 3). 

{"spec_id": "spec_analyst", "pass": 1, "approved": false, "failure_type": "spec_adherence", "issues": [ "The run() function streams raw LLM output directly instead of extracting structured fields (parameters, edge_cases, behavioral_rules) as required by the output schema.", "The web_search tool is declared but never invoked for domain-specific lookups." ]}

18 Each agent undergoes up to three verification passes. Issues are classified by failure type (spec_adherence , grounding , or contract ) to determine the corrective action: specification adherence failures trigger code regeneration with feedback, grounding failures re-run API research, and contract failures re-plan the architecture. 

A.6 Execution Phase: Agent Collaboration 

At runtime, the coordinator executes the four agents in topological order. For a representative function completion problem: Listing 10: Input: function signature and docstring. 

> from typing import List def has_close_elements(numbers: List[float], threshold: float) -> bool: """ Check if in given list of numbers, are any two numbers closer to each other than given threshold. >>> has_close_elements([1.0, 2.0, 3.0], 0.5) False >>> has_close_elements([1.0, 2.8, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 2.0], ... 0.3) True """

The agents execute in sequence: 1. Spec Analyst receives the raw signature and docstring. Outputs: 

function_name="has_close_elements" , two parameters with type hints, 

return_type="bool" , behavioral rule “return True if any pair distance < threshold” , edge cases: [{case: "empty list", expected: False, source: "implied"}, {case: "single element", expected: False, source: "implied"}, {case: "threshold=0", expected: False, source: "implied"}] .2. Strategy Planner receives the spec. Selects chosen_algorithm="nested loop pairwise comparison" , complexity={time: "O(nˆ2)", space: "O(1)"} ,

edge_case_handling_plan mapping each case to an early return. 3. Code Synthesizer receives the spec and strategy. Produces: 

> def has_close_elements(numbers: List[float], threshold: float) -> bool: """ Check if in given list of numbers, are any two numbers closer to each other than given threshold. ... """ for idx, elem in enumerate(numbers): for idx2, elem2 in enumerate(numbers): if idx != idx2: if abs(elem - elem2) < threshold: return True return False

4. Code Verifier receives the code and all upstream artifacts. Checks: signature matches (PASS), docstring verbatim (PASS), edge case guards (PASS — empty list and single element naturally return False from the loop), no third-party imports (PASS). Verdict: PASS .The verified code block is assembled with the benchmark’s hidden unit tests and executed in a sandboxed subprocess. All assertions pass. 19 B Pipeline Trace: Competition Mathematics 

This appendix presents the complete pipeline trace for a multi-agent competition mathematics solver, showing the exact JSON outputs at each stage. The pipeline constructs a swarm of four collaborating agents. 

B.1 Input Task Description 

Listing 11: User prompt T .

Expert competition mathematics solver. Given a math problem from any area (algebra, number theory, counting and probability, geometry, intermediate algebra, prealgebra, or precalculus), solve it step by step with rigorous reasoning. Put your final answer inside \boxed{}. Be precise with LaTeX notation -- fractions as \frac{a}{b}, square roots as \sqrt{x}. One problem per session, pure reasoning, no tool use. 

B.2 Stage 1: Prompt Analysis 

Listing 12: Stage 1 output: ParsedIntent .

{"goal": "Given a single competition mathematics problem from any standard AMC/AIME subject area, solve it step by step with rigorous mathematical reasoning and present the final answer in a LaTeX \\boxed{} expression.", "domain": "Competition Mathematics (AMC 8 / AMC 10 / AMC 12 / AIME)", "tone": "Precise, rigorous, educational -- clear step-by-step derivations with formal LaTeX notation", "entities": [ "AMC 8", "AMC 10", "AMC 12", "AIME", "algebra", "number theory", "counting and probability", "geometry", "intermediate algebra", "prealgebra", "precalculus", "Art of Problem Solving", "LaTeX", "\\boxed{}" ], "constraints": [ "One problem per session", "Full step-by-step reasoning is required", "Final answer must be enclosed in \\boxed{}", "Use precise LaTeX: \\frac{a}{b}, \\sqrt{x}", "No external tools -- pure reasoning only", "Cover all seven subject areas" ], "task_examples": [ {"task_type": "algebra", "description": "Classic AMC/AIME algebraic manipulation -- substitution, factoring, or Vieta’s formulas.", "example": "If x + y = 4 and xy = 5, what is x^2 + y^2? Using (x+y)^2 = x^2 + 2xy + y^2 gives 16 = x^2 + 10 + y^2, so x^2 + y^2 = 6. \\boxed{6}", "source_url": "https://artofproblemsolving.com/..." }, {"task_type": "number theory", "description": "Divisibility, modular arithmetic, prime factorization, or Diophantine equations.", "example": "2023 AIME I Problem 9: polynomial remainder via CRT...", "source_url": "https://artofproblemsolving.com/..." }, {"task_type": "counting and probability", "description": "Combinatorics using permutations, combinations, or inclusion-exclusion.", "example": "Chess team arrangement: 2 boys at ends, 3 girls in middle. 2 x 3! = 12.", 

20 "source_url": "https://www.thinkacademy.ca/..." }, {"task_type": "geometry", "description": "Euclidean geometry -- triangles, circles, area ratios, similarity.", "example": "Triangle with ratio AD:DC = 1:2, find area of sub-triangle via mass point.", "source_url": "https://cheenta.com/..." }, ... // 3 additional categories omitted ]}

Duration: 105 s. Web search retrieved seven task-category examples from Art of Problem Solving, AIME archives, and competition math resources. 

B.3 Stage 2: Swarm Architecture Planning 

The planner decomposes the task into four specialist agents in a six-edge DAG, executed in four sequential phases. Listing 13: Stage 2 output: SwarmPlan overview. 

{"swarm_name": "CompMath Solver Swarm", "summary": "Given a competition mathematics problem, this swarm (1) classifies by domain and difficulty, (2) produces a rigorous step-by-step solution, (3) verifies for logical correctness and LaTeX formatting, and (4) formats the final answer in \\boxed{} notation.", "coordination_strategy": "Strict topological order: Phase 1: problem_classifier (root, no dependencies). Phase 2: specialist_solver (after classifier). Phase 3: solution_verifier (after solver). Phase 4: answer_formatter (after all three). If verifier returns FAIL without a verified_answer, surface the failure rather than presenting an unverified answer.", "dag_edges": [ {"from": "problem_classifier", "to": "specialist_solver"}, {"from": "problem_classifier", "to": "solution_verifier"}, {"from": "problem_classifier", "to": "answer_formatter"}, {"from": "specialist_solver", "to": "solution_verifier"}, {"from": "specialist_solver", "to": "answer_formatter"}, {"from": "solution_verifier", "to": "answer_formatter"} ]}

Duration: 196 s. The planner produced four agent specs with a six-edge DAG. 

B.3.1 Agent Specifications Agent 1: Problem Classifier (root node): Listing 14: Agent spec: problem_classifier .

{"spec_id": "problem_classifier", "role": "Classifies the competition problem by subject area and difficulty tier", "tools": ["web_search"], "dependencies": [], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "raw_problem_text": "string -- verbatim problem as provided by the user" }, 

21 "output_schema": { "subject_area": "string -- one of: algebra | number_theory | counting_and_probability | geometry | intermediate_algebra | prealgebra | precalculus", "difficulty_tier": "string -- one of: AMC_8 | AMC_10 | AMC_12 | AIME", "problem_brief": "string -- normalized restatement listing all givens, constraints, and target quantity in plain English with LaTeX", "key_concepts": "list[string] -- up to 5 relevant concepts (e.g., ’Vieta formulas’, ’inclusion-exclusion’, ’law of cosines’)" }, "description": "Accepts raw problem text; emits structured classification metadata and a normalized problem brief for downstream agents." }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "Given divisors/modular arithmetic, must classify as ’number_theory’", "Given sin/cos identities, must classify as ’precalculus’", "Given a simple ratio/percent problem, must classify as ’prealgebra’, tier ’AMC_8’" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not output any numerical or symbolic answer", "Must not produce more than one subject_area label" ]}}

Agent 2: Specialist Solver (depends on classifier): Listing 15: Agent spec: specialist_solver .

{"spec_id": "specialist_solver", "role": "Produces a rigorous, fully worked step-by-step solution tailored to the classified subject area", "tools": [], "dependencies": ["problem_classifier"], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "subject_area": "string", "difficulty_tier": "string", "problem_brief": "string", "key_concepts": "list[string]" }, "output_schema": { "solution_steps": "string -- full step-by-step solution in LaTeX, each step numbered", "raw_answer": "string -- bare answer value before \\boxed{} wrapping (e.g., ’6’, ’\\frac{3}{7}’)", "strategy_summary": "string -- core technique used", "confidence": "string -- HIGH | MEDIUM | LOW" }, "description": "Accepts classification metadata; emits a complete LaTeX solution with raw answer." }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "Given x + y = 4, xy = 5, must derive x^2 + y^2 = 6 using (x+y)^2 = x^2 + 2xy + y^2", "Counting problems must enumerate cases or apply combinatorial formulas -- no ’by inspection’", "Geometry problems must cite the relevant theorem before applying it" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not invoke web_search or file_generator", "Must not produce a bare numerical answer without accompanying step-by-step derivation" ]}}

22 Agent 3: Solution Verifier (depends on classifier, solver): Listing 16: Agent spec: solution_verifier .

{"spec_id": "solution_verifier", "role": "Independently checks the solution for logical correctness, completeness, and LaTeX formatting", "tools": ["web_search"], "dependencies": ["problem_classifier", "specialist_solver"], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "problem_brief": "string", "solution_steps": "string", "raw_answer": "string", "strategy_summary": "string", "confidence": "string" }, "output_schema": { "verdict": "string -- PASS | FAIL | NEEDS_REVISION", "errors_found": "list[string] -- logical errors, missing justifications, formatting violations", "verified_answer": "string -- confirmed correct answer (may differ from raw_answer)", "verification_notes": "string" }, "description": "Validates solution via three passes: (1) logical audit of each derivation step, (2) answer check by substitution, (3) LaTeX format audit for informal notation." }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "Plain-text ’3/7’ instead of \\frac{3}{7} must be flagged as formatting violation, verdict NEEDS_REVISION", "Logically correct solution with no formatting errors must receive verdict PASS", "If final answer fails substitution back into constraints, verdict must be FAIL with corrected verified_answer" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not produce its own full solution", "Must not emit PASS if any logical step is unjustified or notation violation is present" ]}}

Agent 4: Answer Formatter (depends on all three): Listing 17: Agent spec: answer_formatter .

{"spec_id": "answer_formatter", "role": "Assembles the final publication-ready solution with \\boxed{} answer", "tools": ["file_generator"], "dependencies": ["problem_classifier", "specialist_solver", "solution_verifier"], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "subject_area": "string", "difficulty_tier": "string", "solution_steps": "string", "strategy_summary": "string", "verdict": "string", "errors_found": "list[string]", "verified_answer": "string" }, "output_schema": { "final_document": "string -- complete Markdown + LaTeX document ending with the boxed answer", "boxed_answer": "string -- \\boxed{<answer>}", "document_file_path": "string -- optional file path" }, "description": "Assembles formatted document using 

23 verified_answer (not raw_answer). If verdict is FAIL/NEEDS_REVISION, applies corrections from errors_found before assembling." }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "final_document must end with $$\\boxed{<verified_answer>}$$", "boxed_answer must use verified_answer from solution_verifier, not raw_answer from solver", "Must include header with subject_area and difficulty_tier" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not omit the \\boxed{} expression", "Must not use raw_answer if solution_verifier overrode it with a different verified_answer" ]}}

B.4 Stage 3: Directive-Driven API Research 

Listing 18: Stage 3: API research results (abbreviated). 

{"directive_results": [ {"directive_id": "problem_classifier", "research_summary": "Searched for AMC/AIME problem classification taxonomies and difficulty tier definitions..." }, {"directive_id": "specialist_solver", "research_summary": "Searched for competition math solution techniques, theorem references, and LaTeX formatting conventions..." }, {"directive_id": "solution_verifier", "research_summary": "Searched for mathematical proof verification approaches and common AMC/AIME solution errors..." }, {"directive_id": "answer_formatter", "research_summary": "Searched for LaTeX \\boxed{} formatting standards and competition math publication conventions..." }]}

Duration: 361 s. Four search directives executed, one per agent spec. 

B.5 Stage 4 + 5: Per-Agent Code Generation and Verification 

Each agent spec undergoes independent code generation and verification. The problem_classifier 

spec required three verification passes, all of which identified specification-adherence violations: Listing 19: Verification trace for problem_classifier .

Pass 1 (rejected -- spec_adherence): {"issues": [ "The system prompt instructs the agent to solve problems step-by-step, but the architecture plan states the classifier must NOT attempt any solution steps.", "The agent is not a solver -- embedding solution instructions causes it to produce answers instead of classification metadata." ]}

24 Pass 2 (rejected -- spec_adherence): {"issues": [ "web_search tool definition uses Anthropic’s server-side format (’web_search_20250305’) which requires specific SDK handling.", "Tool object missing required field validation." ]}Pass 3 (rejected -- spec_adherence): {"issues": [ "System prompt still contains solution-generation instructions that violate the classifier’s role.", "Agent outputs must be structured classification metadata, not free-form solutions." ]}

Total verification time: 480 s across three passes. The repeated specification-adherence failures demonstrate the verifier’s ability to detect role confusion—a generated agent whose system prompt conflates classification with solving—and persistently reject it. 

B.6 Execution Example 

At runtime, the coordinator executes the four agents in topological order. For the problem: 

“If f (x) = 3x−2

x−2 , what is the value of f (−2)+ f (−1)+ f (0) ? Express your answer as a common fraction.” 

1. Problem Classifier outputs: 

{"subject_area": "algebra", "difficulty_tier": "AMC_10", "key_concepts": ["rational functions", "function evaluation", "fraction arithmetic"], "problem_brief": "Given f(x) = (3x-2)/(x-2), compute f(-2) + f(-1) + f(0) as a common fraction." }

2. Specialist Solver outputs: 

{"solution_steps": "Step 1: Evaluate f(-2) = (3(-2)-2)/(-2-2) = (-8)/(-4) = 2. Step 2: Evaluate f(-1) = (3(-1)-2)/(-1-2) = (-5)/(-3) = 5/3. Step 3: Evaluate f(0) = (3(0)-2)/(0-2) = (-2)/(-2) = 1. Step 4: Sum = 2 + 5/3 + 1 = 6/3 + 5/3 + 3/3 = 14/3.", "raw_answer": "\\frac{14}{3}", "strategy_summary": "Direct substitution into rational function, then fraction addition.", "confidence": "HIGH" }

3. Solution Verifier outputs: 

{"verdict": "PASS", "errors_found": [], "verified_answer": "\\frac{14}{3}", "verification_notes": "Each substitution verified. Fraction addition confirmed: 6/3 + 5/3 + 3/3 = 14/3. All notation uses \\frac{}{} correctly." }

4. Answer Formatter outputs: 25 {"final_document": "[Algebra | AMC 10]\n\nStep 1: ... \n\nStrategy: Direct substitution.\n\n $$\\boxed{\\frac{14}{3}}$$", "boxed_answer": "\\boxed{\\frac{14}{3}}" }

26 C Pipeline Trace: Reading Comprehension with Discrete Reasoning 

This appendix presents the complete pipeline trace for a multi-agent reading comprehension system designed for passage-based discrete reasoning tasks. The pipeline constructs a swarm of four collaborating agents. 

C.1 Input Task Description 

Listing 20: User prompt T .

Expert reading comprehension and discrete reasoning agent. Given a factual passage and a question, answer by performing numerical reasoning over the text -- counting entities, computing differences, sorting values, or extracting specific spans. Read the passage carefully and reason step by step. Your final answer should be a short phrase, number, or date. Put your final answer on the last line after ’ANSWER: ’. Give only the answer, not a full sentence. 

C.2 Stage 1: Prompt Analysis 

Listing 21: Stage 1 output: ParsedIntent .

{"goal": "Given a factual passage and a question, answer by performing numerical or discrete reasoning --counting, arithmetic, sorting, or span extraction --and return a short phrase, number, or date.", "domain": "Natural Language Processing / Reading Comprehension", "tone": "precise, analytical, step-by-step", "entities": [ "passage", "question", "numerical reasoning", "counting", "arithmetic", "span extraction", "sorting", "date comparison" ], "constraints": [ "Answer must be a short phrase, number, or date", "Final answer on the last line after ’ANSWER: ’", "Reason step by step before the final answer", "Read the passage carefully; no outside knowledge", "Perform discrete operations: counting, subtraction, addition, sorting, max/min, span extraction" ], "task_examples": [ {"task_type": "arithmetic difference", "description": "Numerical difference between two values explicitly stated in the passage.", "example": "Passage: ’Seahawks scored 14 points, Patriots scored 7.’ Q: ’How many more points did the Seahawks score?’ ANSWER: 7", "source_url": "https://ucinlp.github.io/.../drop..." }, {"task_type": "entity counting", "description": "Count entities of a specific type.", "example": "Passage: ’TDs by Brady, Gronkowski, and Edelman.’ Q: ’How many players threw TDs?’ ANSWER: 3", "source_url": "https://ucinlp.github.io/.../drop..." }, {"task_type": "span extraction", "description": "Direct answer as a verbatim span.", "example": "Passage: ’Battle of Hastings on 14 October 1066.’ Q: ’When?’ ANSWER: 14 Oct 1066", "source_url": "https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD..." }, {"task_type": "sorting / ranking", "description": "Compare enumerated values to find the maximum, minimum, first, or last.", 

27 "example": "Q: ’Which team scored the fewest?’ ANSWER: Team B", "source_url": "https://ucinlp.github.io/.../drop..." }, ... // additional categories omitted ]}

Duration: 278 s. Web search retrieved examples covering eight reasoning types (arithmetic, counting, span extraction, sorting, date duration, aggregation, multi-hop, and negation). 

C.3 Stage 2: Swarm Architecture Planning 

The planner decomposes the task into four specialist agents in a five-edge DAG. Listing 22: Stage 2 output: SwarmPlan overview. 

{"swarm_name": "DROP Numerical Reasoning Swarm", "summary": "Four specialist agents collaborate in a pipeline: (1) a Passage Analyst parses the passage to extract all entities, numbers, dates, and spans; (2) a Question Classifier identifies the reasoning operation required; (3) a Reasoning Engine executes the discrete operation step by step; and (4) an Answer Formatter validates and emits the final answer after ’ANSWER: ’.", "coordination_strategy": "Strict sequential pipeline. Stage 1: passage_analyst (root, no dependencies). Stage 2: question_classifier (after passage_analyst). Stage 3: reasoning_engine (after both). Stage 4: answer_formatter (after reasoning_engine).", "dag_edges": [ {"from": "passage_analyst", "to": "question_classifier"}, {"from": "passage_analyst", "to": "reasoning_engine"}, {"from": "question_classifier", "to": "reasoning_engine"}, {"from": "reasoning_engine", "to": "answer_formatter"}, {"from": "question_classifier", "to": "answer_formatter"} ]}

Duration: 140 s. The planner produced four agent specs with a five-edge DAG. 

C.3.1 Agent Specifications Agent 1: Passage Analyst (root node): Listing 23: Agent spec: passage_analyst .

{"spec_id": "passage_analyst", "role": "Extracts structured facts from the passage", "tools": ["file_generator"], "dependencies": [], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "passage": "string -- raw factual passage", "question": "string -- used to guide which entity types to prioritize during extraction" }, "output_schema": { "numbers": "list of {value: float, unit: string|null, context: string, entity_ref: string|null}", "dates": "list of {raw: string, normalized_iso: string, context: string}", "entities": "list of {name: string, type: person|place|team|object, attributes: list of {key, value}}", "candidate_spans": "list of {span_text: string, char_start: int, char_end: int, 

28 span_type: number|date|name|phrase}", "passage_sentences": "list of strings" }, "description": "Receives raw passage and question; outputs structured fact table of all entities, numbers, dates, and verbatim spans." }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "Given ’14 points’ in the passage, numbers must include {value: 14, unit: ’points’}", "Given ’October 1066’, dates must include a normalized ISO entry", "Must not answer the question -- only structure the passage" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not produce any answer or reasoning about the question", "Must not introduce facts not present in the passage" ]}}

Agent 2: Question Classifier (depends on passage_analyst ): Listing 24: Agent spec: question_classifier .

{"spec_id": "question_classifier", "role": "Classifies the reasoning operation required by the question", "tools": ["web_search"], "dependencies": ["passage_analyst"], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "question": "string", "numbers": "list -- from passage_analyst", "dates": "list -- from passage_analyst", "entities": "list -- from passage_analyst", "candidate_spans": "list -- from passage_analyst" }, "output_schema": { "operation_type": "string -- one of: arithmetic_difference | entity_counting | span_extraction | sorting_ranking | date_duration | aggregation_summation | conditional_multihop | negation_exclusion | comparison_boolean | unanswerable", "reasoning_plan": "list of strings -- numbered step-by-step plan for the Reasoning Engine", "required_operands": "list of {operand_ref: string, source: ’numbers’|’entities’|’dates’|’spans’, role: string}", "confidence": "float 0.0-1.0" }, "description": "Identifies operation type and produces a step-by-step reasoning plan with operand refs." }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "Given ’How many more...’, must classify as ’arithmetic_difference’", "Given ’How many players...’, must classify as ’entity_counting’", "reasoning_plan must contain at least one step" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not compute the final answer", "Must not produce more than one operation_type" ]}}

Agent 3: Reasoning Engine (depends on passage_analyst , question_classifier ): 29 Listing 25: Agent spec: reasoning_engine .

{"spec_id": "reasoning_engine", "role": "Executes the discrete reasoning operation and computes the raw answer", "tools": ["file_generator"], "dependencies": ["passage_analyst", "question_classifier"], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "question": "string", "numbers": "list -- from passage_analyst", "dates": "list -- from passage_analyst", "entities": "list -- from passage_analyst", "candidate_spans": "list -- from passage_analyst", "passage_sentences": "list -- from passage_analyst", "operation_type": "string -- from classifier", "reasoning_plan": "list -- from classifier", "required_operands": "list -- from classifier" }, "output_schema": { "raw_answer": "string|number|date", "answer_type": "string -- number|span|date", "chain_of_thought": "list of strings -- one entry per reasoning step with intermediate results", "supporting_evidence": "list of strings --passage sentences used as evidence" }, "description": "Executes arithmetic, counting, sorting, date arithmetic, span extraction, or multi-hop reasoning step by step." }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "Given operation_type=’arithmetic_difference’ with operands 14 and 7, raw_answer must be 7", "chain_of_thought must contain at least as many entries as reasoning_plan steps", "supporting_evidence must be non-empty for answerable questions" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not introduce facts not present in the structured fact table", "Must not skip steps listed in reasoning_plan" ]}}

Agent 4: Answer Formatter (depends on reasoning_engine , question_classifier ): Listing 26: Agent spec: answer_formatter .

{"spec_id": "answer_formatter", "role": "Validates, formats, and emits the final compliant answer", "tools": ["file_generator"], "dependencies": ["reasoning_engine", "question_classifier"], "io_contract": { "input_schema": { "question": "string", "raw_answer": "string|number|date", "answer_type": "string", "operation_type": "string", "chain_of_thought": "list of strings", "supporting_evidence": "list of strings" }, "output_schema": { "final_output": "string -- full response with chain-of-thought followed by blank line then ’ANSWER: <formatted_answer>’ on the last line", "formatted_answer": "string -- the bare answer (number, short phrase, or date)", "validation_status": "string -- VALID | INVALID | UNANSWERABLE" }, 

30 "description": "Validates raw_answer against answer_type, formats it (strips units, normalizes dates, rounds floats), and assembles the final output with chain-of-thought followed by ’ANSWER: <value>’ on the last line." }, "verification_criteria": { "behavioral_assertions": [ "final_output must end with a line matching ’ANSWER: <value>’ exactly", "formatted_answer must be a bare number, short phrase, or date -- not a full sentence", "If validation_status is INVALID, final_output must still contain the best-supported answer" ], "forbidden_patterns": [ "Must not omit the ’ANSWER: ’ prefix", "Must not emit a full sentence as the answer" ]}}

C.4 Stage 3: Directive-Driven API Research 

Listing 27: Stage 3: API research results (abbreviated). 

{"directive_results": [ {"directive_id": "passage_analyst", "research_summary": "Searched for named entity recognition and number extraction approaches for factual passages..." }, {"directive_id": "question_classifier", "research_summary": "Searched for discrete reasoning operation taxonomies and question classification techniques for reading comprehension..." }, {"directive_id": "reasoning_engine", "research_summary": "Searched for numerical reasoning approaches over unstructured text, including counting, arithmetic, and date computation..." }, {"directive_id": "answer_formatter", "research_summary": "Searched for answer formatting conventions and validation approaches for short-answer reading comprehension..." }]}

Duration: 706 s. Four search directives executed, one per agent spec. 

C.5 Execution Example 

At runtime, the coordinator executes the four agents in topological order. For the problem: Listing 28: Input passage and question. 

Passage: "Hoping to rebound from their loss to the Patriots, the Raiders stayed at home for a Week 16 duel with the Houston Texans. Oakland took the early lead when Chaz Schilens hauled in a 10-yard touchdown pass from JaMarcus Russell in the first quarter. The Texans responded with a 28-yard field goal by Kris Brown. In the second quarter, Oakland extended its lead with a Sebastian Janikowski 40-yard field goal." Question: "How many field goals were kicked?" 

31 1. Passage Analyst extracts the structured fact table: 

{"numbers": [ {"value": 10, "unit": "yards", "context": "10-yard touchdown pass", "entity_ref": "Chaz Schilens"}, {"value": 28, "unit": "yards", "context": "28-yard field goal", "entity_ref": "Kris Brown"}, {"value": 40, "unit": "yards", "context": "40-yard field goal", "entity_ref": "Sebastian Janikowski"} ], "entities": [ {"name": "Chaz Schilens", "type": "person", "attributes": [{"key": "play", "value": "TD catch"}]}, {"name": "Kris Brown", "type": "person", "attributes": [{"key": "play", "value": "FG"}]}, {"name": "Sebastian Janikowski", "type": "person", "attributes": [{"key": "play", "value": "FG"}]} ]}

2. Question Classifier identifies: 

{"operation_type": "entity_counting", "reasoning_plan": [ "1. Identify all field goal events in the passage", "2. Count the distinct field goal events", "3. Return the count" ], "required_operands": [ {"operand_ref": "Kris Brown FG", "source": "entities", "role": "count_target"}, {"operand_ref": "Janikowski FG", "source": "entities", "role": "count_target"} ], "confidence": 0.95 }

3. Reasoning Engine executes: 

{"raw_answer": 2, "answer_type": "number", "chain_of_thought": [ "Step 1: Field goals in passage: (a) 28-yard FG by Kris Brown, (b) 40-yard FG by Janikowski.", "Step 2: Count = 2.", "Step 3: Verify -- no other field goals mentioned." ], "supporting_evidence": [ "The Texans responded with a 28-yard field goal by Kris Brown.", "Oakland extended its lead with a Sebastian Janikowski 40-yard field goal." ]}

4. Answer Formatter outputs: 

{"final_output": "Step 1: Field goals in passage: (a) 28-yard FG by Kris Brown, (b) 40-yard FG by Janikowski.\nStep 2: Count = 2.\nStep 3: Verified -- no other FGs mentioned.\n\nANSWER: 2", "formatted_answer": "2", "validation_status": "VALID" }

32