Title: Knowing When to Ask: Self-Gated Clarification for Hierarchical Language Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11349v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:06:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
## Knowing When to Ask: Self-Gated Clarification for Hierarchical Language Agents 

Aijing Gao, Yiming Kang, Mengdie Flora Wang, Jae Oh Woo 

Amazon Web Services 

{gaijing, ymkang, florawan, jaeohwoo}@amazon.com 

Abstract 

In hierarchical reasoning, failures often orig-inate at intermediate decision points where the agent commits to a wrong branch without recognizing that it lacks critical information. Rather than treating clarification as an exter-nal uncertainty trigger, we propose A CTION -RATING , a formulation that places it inside the agent’s action space on a shared ordinal scale with navigation, so that asking competes di-rectly with acting at every decision point and help-seeking becomes observable at intermedi-ate states. Two structurally distinct information-seeking modes emerge from the agent’s own ratings: mandatory (no viable branch) and op-portunistic (residual uncertainty despite a lead-ing candidate). On Harmonized Tariff Sched-ule classification (30,000-node taxonomy, three benchmarks, 9 LLMs across 4 families), we ob-serve a regime shift from mandatory to oppor-tunistic clarification, with Information-Seeking Effectiveness (ISE), a local diagnostic defined as the fraction of help interactions followed by a correct next navigation step (not a final-task metric), rising from 50% to 74%. Three diag-nostic contrasts fail to reproduce this structure. A separability test shows that the information-seeking pattern (mode split, ISE ranking) per-sists when answer quality is degraded ( −18.8% accuracy), supporting an empirical separation between where an agent seeks help and the quality of the help it receives. Under the con-trolled answer channel, accuracy gains reach 

+16.2% at 10-digit; we read this as an upper bound on what better localization could unlock, not a deployment estimate. 

1 Introduction 

Language agents that reason over hierarchical struc-tures (medical codes, legal statutes, product tax-onomies) face a recurring failure mode: once the agent commits to a wrong intermediate branch, every subsequent step merely elaborates an error that should have been caught earlier (Yao et al., 2023b,a; Shinn et al., 2023; Press et al., 2023; Dziri et al., 2024). Final-answer accuracy tells us that 

the system failed, but not where , at which decision point the agent lacked the information to proceed safely. The core question is deceptively simple: 

when should the agent ask for help instead of com-mitting? 

Why current approaches fall short. Existing de-signs treat clarification as external to the reasoning trajectory: a confidence threshold (Kadavath et al., 2022), a prompt instruction (“ask if unsure”), or sampling-based disagreement (Kuhn et al., 2023). These mechanisms decouple the decision to ask from the decision to act, leaving two problems unsolved. First, they do not make information-seeking behavior structurally observable : we can-not distinguish an agent that asks because no viable branch exists from one that asks to reduce residual uncertainty. Second, they confound where help was sought with what help was received: an agent that asks more may perform better simply because it gets better information. 

Clarification as action. We propose A CTION -RATING , a formulation that addresses both prob-lems by placing clarification inside the agent’s own action space (Figure 1). The agent scores candidate next actions, including a dedicated clarification action, on a shared [0 , 100] ordinal scale, so that asking competes directly with acting at each deci-sion point. This shared-scale competition makes the local need for help observable without any ex-ternal uncertainty estimator. Two structurally dis-tinct modes emerge from the agent’s own ratings: 

mandatory help, where clarification is top-ranked and no navigation branch is viable, and opportunis-tic help, where a leading branch exists but a tar-geted question can reduce residual uncertainty be-fore commitment.                                                                           

> arXiv:2606.11349v1 [cs.AI] 9 Jun 2026 Taxonomy depth
> Each pair of digits narrows the path.
> 2-DIG 40 Chapter — Rubber
> ⌄
> 4-DIG 40 11 Heading — Pneumatic tyres
> ⌄
> 6-DIG 4011. 10 Subheading — Motor cars
> ⌄
> 8-DIG 4011.10. 10 Statistical — Radial
> ⌄
> 10-DIG 4011.10.10. 10 Leaf — Final tari ff
> ActionRating
> Score shared across all actions; fi re need_clarify when score .
> traverse(4011.10) 78
> traverse(4012.20) 42
> need_clarify 55
> confirm 18
> Mandatory
> no viable branch
> Opportunistic
> leading branch + clarify
> Controlled answers
> Fix answer quality , vary — isolates where from what .
> 1Rate actions — clarify
> ⌄
> 2Sub-agent — emits
> ⌄
> 3Owner — returns (fi xed)
> ⌄
> 4Re-rate —injected
> A · Pipeline
> BRegime shift — mandatory opportunistic §5.2 · CBP-NY, Claude Opus 4.6
> A previously absent opportunistic mode activates under self-gating ( ).
> ISE rises with accuracy while navigation steps are unchanged.
> Baseline (no clarify)
> Mandatory 35.2%
> Opportun. 0.0%
> ISE 50%
> Acc. (10-d) 50.8%
> ActionRating ()
> Mandatory 13.9%
> Opportun. 88.7%
> ISE 74%
> Acc. (10-d) 67.0%
> +24 pt ISE ·+16.2% acc. · opportunistic share
> CSeparability — localization vs. answer quality §5.3 · controlled vs. uncontrolled
> Replacing controlled with auto-generated answers collapses accuracy.
> Yet the information-seeking pattern (modes, ISE ranking) is preserved.
> Controlled Uncontrolled
> Acc. (10-d) 67.0% 48.2% ()
> Mode split 14% / 89% preserved
> ISE rank preserved
> Localization is a stable property; -quality determines realization of the gain.
> B & C · Findings

Figure 1: Overview of A CTION RATING . (A) Pipeline. The agent rates all candidate actions, including 

need_clarify , on a shared [0 , 100] ordinal scale; clarification fires when its score exceeds threshold τ . Two modes emerge: mandatory (no viable branch) and opportunistic (a leading branch exists but clarify still scores above τ ). A controlled answer channel fixes answer quality to isolate where help is sought from what is received. 

(B, C) Findings (§5.1, §5.4; previewed here, not part of the pipeline). At τ =10 , opportunistic share 0 → 88 .7% ,ISE 50% → 74% , accuracy 50 .8% → 67 .0% (B) . Replacing controlled with auto-generated answers collapses accuracy ( −18.8%) yet preserves the mode split and ISE ranking (C) , supporting an empirical separation between help localization and answer-source quality under controlled degradation. 

Isolating help localization. To analyze information-seeking behavior cleanly, we must separate where help was sought from what 

was received. We pair A CTION RATING with a controlled answer channel that fixes answer quality, analogous to holding one experimental factor constant to analyze another. We also track Information-Seeking Effectiveness (ISE), the fraction of help interactions after which the agent’s next navigation lands on the correct path, as a local utility probe (§5.2). Mode shift alone shows structural change but not utility; ISE alone measures local usefulness but not global structure; accuracy alone is confounded by answer quality. Together the three provide converging evidence. 

Test bed. We evaluate on Harmonized Tar-iff Schedule (HTS) classification, a language-mediated taxonomy of 30,000+ nodes where item descriptions are free-text, taxonomy headings are natural-language definitions, and clarification is it-self a language-generation act. HTS provides the structural prerequisites (deep branching, repeated intermediate commitments, genuine information gaps, and verifiable ground truth) that make the measurement question nontrivial (§4.1). 

Contributions. (1) Framework. We formulate clarification as a selectable action competing with navigation on a shared ordinal scale, yielding a self-gated mechanism that makes information-seeking behavior directly observable. (2) Behavioral anal-ysis. The framework reveals a regime shift, not more questions but a structural transition from mandatory to opportunistic clarification, with ISE rising from 50% to 74%. Three diagnostic con-trasts (prompt-level, sampling-based, rating-only) do not reproduce this shift. (3) Separability. When answer quality is degraded, accuracy collapses (−18.8%) while the information-seeking pattern (mode split, ISE ranking) is preserved, supporting an empirical separation between help localization and answer-source quality under controlled degra-dation. Accuracy gains under the controlled answer channel ( +16.2% at 10-digit) are read as an upper bound on what better localization could unlock, not a deployment estimate. Evaluation spans 9 LLMs (4 families), three benchmarks, component abla-tion, and threshold sensitivity. 

2 Related Work 

Our work intersects LLM agents for structured rea-soning (Yao et al., 2023b,a; Shinn et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Schick et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023; Sumers et al., 2024), self-evaluation and uncer-tainty (Wang et al., 2023a; Madaan et al., 2023; Cobbe et al., 2021; Lightman et al., 2024; Kada-vath et al., 2022; Kuhn et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023), information-seeking and clari-fication (Settles, 2012; Wang et al., 2023b; Alian-nejadi et al., 2019; Zamani et al., 2020; Rao and III, 2018; Rahmani et al., 2023), selective predic-tion and abstention (Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2017; El-Yaniv and Wiener, 2010; Kamath et al., 2020), hierarchical classification (Jr. and Freitas, 2011; Kowsari et al., 2017; Shimura et al., 2018; Baner-jee et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020; Mao et al., 2019), and multi-step reasoning (Wei et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Khot et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023; Nye et al., 2021; Zelikman et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2023; Besta et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Dua et al., 2022). A full discussion is in Appendix H. Three distinctions position our contribution. First ,existing agent frameworks address general reason-ing over flat or lightly structured spaces; we tar-get deep hierarchical taxonomies where each step narrows the search space. Second , self-evaluation methods rate final answers or sample agreement; we rate candidate actions , including clarification, on a shared ordinal scale, so that clarification com-petes directly with navigation rather than being triggered by final-answer confidence or sampling disagreement. Third , prior clarification work as-sumes external uncertainty estimators or human interlocutors; our mechanism is entirely self-gated 

from the agent’s own action ratings. 

3 Framework 

3.1 Hierarchical Navigation as MDP 

We model hierarchical reasoning as an episodic Markov Decision Process (Puterman, 1994) M =(S, A, T , R). States are taxonomy nodes aug-mented with the item description and navi-gation history. Actions comprise five types: 

traverse_child , backtrack , need_clarify (q),

jump (c), and confirm . Transitions induced by a selected taxonomy action are deterministic (the navigation environment is a fixed tree); stochastic-ity enters through the LLM policy π(a | s) and through the answer-generation channel invoked by 

need_clarify . Rewards assign +1 /−1 for cor-rect/incorrect classification. 

3.2 ACTION RATING : Asking as a Selectable Action 

The core idea is to make help-needed states observ-able by placing clarification inside the agent’s own action space rather than treating it as an external de-cision (a worked example of the self-gated reentry cycle is in Figure 4, Appendix A). A CTION RATING 

asks the agent to rate its top-K candidate actions, including a dedicated need_clarify action, on a 

[0 , 100] ordinal relevance scale before committing (full rating prompt in Appendix P.3). At step t, the agent produces: 

{(ai, s i, r i)}Ki=1 , a∗ = arg max  

> i

si

where ai is the i-th candidate action, si ∈ [0 , 100] 

its ordinal score, ri a one-sentence rationale, and 

a∗ the selected action. The action-rating step itself is implemented within a single navigation call per step. However, when clarification is triggered, the full system incurs additional sub-agent and reentry calls at that step (see the accuracy–cost analysis in §6). The rating serves two functions: (1) it makes help-needed states directly observable via the ask-vs-act competition, producing the manda-tory/opportunistic distinction that is our primary analytical object; and (2) it forces deliberative comparison between candidates before commit-ting. In our experiments (Appendix I), the behav-ioral change comes primarily from self-gated help-seeking rather than from rating alone, indicating that the rating’s main value lies in enabling obser-vation and gating of help-needed states. 

Controlled answer channel. To isolate help lo-calization from answer quality, we use a controlled answer channel, analogous to holding one experi-mental factor fixed while analyzing another. Two paired conditions complete the design: (1) a con-trolled condition that fixes answer quality high, so behavioral differences primarily reflect help local-ization rather than variation in answer quality; and (2) a degraded condition that removes privileged access as a separability test : information-seeking patterns surviving while accuracy collapses pro-vides evidence for an empirical separation between help localization and answer-source quality (§5.4). The controlled channel simulates a knowledgeable product owner who can provide authoritative at-tribute facts (material composition, intended use, manufacturing method) while explicit classification codes are masked (see Appendix P.1). A post-hoc audit confirms that 96% of answers contain only do-main or technical-specification knowledge (§5.4). Accuracy numbers are therefore upper bounds, not deployment estimates. 

3.3 Self-Gated Information Seeking 

A key property of the rating is that need_clarify 

competes directly with navigation actions on the same scale. When need_clarify appears among the top-K with score ≥ τ (clarification threshold ), the agent invokes a clarification sub-agent at the current node :The procedure has four stages: (1) Detect : iden-tify ∃ i ≤ K such that ai = need_clarify ∧

si ≥ τ ; (2) Clarify : invoke sub-agent ˆa =

ClarifyAgent (qi, item ); (3) Inject : add the answer to observation ot; (4) Re-select : run action selec-tion again with the enriched observation ( reentry ). This self-gated reentry requires no changes to the outer navigation loop: clarification is absorbed within the step. The threshold τ controls aggres-siveness: lower values trigger more clarifications. We analyze sensitivity in §5.3. 

Two help-needed modes. We define two modes purely from the rank of need_clarify within the top-K list. Mandatory help : need_clarify is the top-ranked action ( rank = 1 ); no navigation branch scores above it. Opportunistic help : a navigation action leads the ranking, but need_clarify ap-pears among positions 2– K with score ≥ τ .The definition is operational: it depends only on the rank, not on any interpretation of why the agent ranked it there. Empirically, rank-1 place-ment tends to correspond to states where no navi-gation branch appears viable, while lower-ranked placement corresponds to states with a preferred branch but residual uncertainty, consistent with the classical notion of value of information (Howard, 1966; Raiffa and Schlaifer, 1961). Both modes are self-triggered from the same ordinal action-rating signal, requiring no external uncertainty estima-tor. Together they form an observational taxonomy, not a classification of true epistemic need, but a structured partition that produces a consistent be-havioral signature (mode shift, ISE improvement, separability) absent under simpler triggers (§4). Structural properties (monotone trigger sets, bounded reentry) and a threshold-policy sanity check stating a sufficient single-crossing condition under which a threshold policy is optimal are de-ferred to Appendix A. We treat this as a concep-tual sanity check, not a guarantee for LLM-emitted scores, which are not assumed to be calibrated. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 HTS as a Language-Mediated Testbed 

HTS classification is a language-mediated hierar-chical reasoning task: item descriptions are free-text and inherently ambiguous (e.g., “cough drops” could be medicament or confectionery), taxonomy nodes are defined by natural-language headings with legal-text qualifications, and clarification is itself a language-generation act; the agent must formulate a discriminative question in natural lan-guage and interpret a textual answer. The entire reasoning chain, from item description through in-termediate decisions to clarification, operates in language space. We require four structural preconditions for the measurement question to be nontrivial: (i) deep branching so that early errors compound, (ii) repeated intermediate commitments so that information-seeking varies across steps, (iii) in-formation gaps severe enough that targeted clarifi-cation carries real value, and (iv) verifiable ground truth . Flat classification fails (i)–(ii); shallow QA benchmarks fail (i); open-ended reasoning fails (iv). HTS, a hierarchical taxonomy used in international trade to assign 10-digit codes to imported goods, satisfies all four: 30,000+ nodes across 5 levels (branching factors up to 50+), General Rules of Interpretation requiring special-case protocols (Ap-pendix E), systematically incomplete product de-scriptions, and verified ground-truth codes from U.S. Customs rulings (U.S. Customs and Border Protection, 2025b). We construct a knowledge graph (U.S. Customs and Border Protection, 2025a; Pan et al., 2024) as the MDP environment (Ap-pendix B). We separate Layer 1 (domain instanti-ation: KG, GRI protocols, answer channel; HTS-specific, must be re-implemented per domain) from 

Layer 2 (measurement protocol: action-space for-mulation, mandatory/opportunistic analysis, ISE, threshold sweep; portable to any tree-structured reasoning task). 

Datasets and metrics. We evaluate on three benchmarks: CBP-NY (1,181 products extracted from public CBP rulings (U.S. Customs and Border Protection, 2025b) via LLM-based pipeline (Ap-pendix O), ATLAS (200 samples (Yuvraj and De-varakonda, 2025)), and HSCodeComp (632 expert-annotated records (Yang et al., 2025)). We report hierarchical accuracy at each depth level (2–10 dig-its), success rate, average navigation steps, and ISE (§5.2). 

4.2 Setup 

We evaluate 9 LLMs across 4 families as MDP navigators; A CTION RATING (τ =10 ) is applied to 5 of them. The baseline uses greedy action se-lection without scoring or gating (Appendix P.2). The controlled answer channel uses CBP ruling at-tributes with codes masked (Appendix P.1, C). Two 

diagnostic contrasts test alternative explanations: 

H1 : a prompt-level instruction suffices (CoT-Ask-if-Unsure; Appendix F); H2 : a sampling-based trigger suffices (Self-Consistency, N =3 ; (Wang et al., 2023a); Appendix G). H3 (deliberation with-out actioning) is tested by the rating-only ablation (τ =101 ). 

5 Results 

5.1 Information-Seeking Behavior under ACTION RATING 

Table 1 presents results across all 9 baseline mod-els, two diagnostic contrasts (CoT-Ask-if-Unsure and Self-Consistency, N =3 ), and Claude Opus 4.6 with A CTION RATING . The primary signals are 

what changes in information-seeking behavior , not the accuracy numbers themselves (which are upper bounds under the controlled answer channel). 

A distinctive clarification pattern emerges. 

ACTION RATING (τ =10 ) produces a three-part be-havioral signature absent from all comparison con-ditions: (i) a regime shift from mandatory to oppor-tunistic clarification (35.2% →13.9% mandatory; 0% →88.7% opportunistic), (ii) rising local utility (ISE: 50% →74%), and (iii) accuracy co-movement at every hierarchy depth. This is a structural change in where the agent seeks clarification, not merely 

how often ; the volume increase is a consequence of opportunistic mode activation, not its cause (§5.2– 5.4). 

Gating, not scoring, drives the regime shift. 

Rating-only ( τ =101 ; Appendix I) retains the full scoring apparatus but disables the gating threshold so that no clarification ever fires. Despite having the deliberation step, it yields −0.9% and produces no opportunistic events, directly isolating gating as the mechanism behind the regime shift. CoT-Ask-if-Unsure (H1) and Self-Consistency (H2) similarly fail to reproduce the three-part signature, arguing against prompt-level instruction and sampling dis-agreement as sufficient triggers. Among the tested alternatives, only shared-scale action competition, where asking competes with acting at the same lo-cal decision point, produces the observed structure. 

Upper-bound accuracy under controlled an-swers. Under the controlled answer channel, Claude Opus 4.6 reaches 67.0% 10-digit accu-racy ( +16.2% over baseline 50.8%), with gains increasing monotonically with depth, consistent with the claim that deeper hierarchy levels benefit most from better help localization. These numbers bound what better localization could unlock when high-quality answers are available. Cost rises from 6.0 to 10.4 calls/record (Figure 3). The behavioral signature generalizes across 4 LLM families (Ta-ble 8, Appendix J) and two additional benchmarks (ATLAS and HSCodeComp) with τ =10 locked from CBP-NY, providing an out-of-sample gener-alization test (Table 9, Appendix K). 

5.2 Information-Seeking Effectiveness (ISE) 

A central question is whether self-gating merely increases the volume of help-seeking or also im-proves its local usefulness; i.e., whether help was requested at states that genuinely needed it. We define Information-Seeking Effectiveness (ISE) as a localized help-utility probe : the fraction of help interactions after which the agent’s next navigation action lands on the correct path: ISE = # QA followed by correct traverse # total QA interactions ISE tests whether each identified help interaction was locally useful : if help was requested and the next action was correct, the interaction was produc-tive at the one-step level. Because the controlled answer channel fixes answer quality, ISE variation across conditions reflects differences in where the agent sought help, not what it received. 

Self-gating improves quality, not just volume. 

At τ =10 , the agent issues 6 × more clarifications (2.4 vs. 0.4/record), yet ISE rises from 50% to 74% (Figure 2a). Virtually all additional volume is opportunistic, and both modes attain ≈75% ISE (Figure 2b). At τ =1 , volume increases further (5.9 QA/record) but ISE drops to 62%: the addi-tional questions are less likely to land on the correct path. This dissociation between volume and quality is the clearest evidence that the framework distin-guishes asking at the right place from asking more often .Table 1: Hierarchical accuracy (%) across models and confidence-triggering methods on HTS classification (N =1 ,181 ). Cell shading: high to low . CoT-Ask-if-Unsure : single prompt instruction to ask clarification when uncertain. Self-Consistency (N =3 ): trigger clarification on action disagreement ( † ≈ 19 LLM calls/record). AR (τ =10 ): Claude Opus 4.6 with A CTION RATING . Significance markers on ∆ rows are based on non-parametric paired bootstrap ( nboot =5 ,000 ): ∗∗∗ 95 % CI strictly positive; ns CI includes zero.                                                                                                                        

> Model # Params Succ. (%) 2-digit 4-digit 6-digit 8-digit 10-digit Avg Steps
> Closed-Source Models (Baseline MDP)
> Claude Opus 4.6 —97.3 79.3 70.9 61.8 54.4 50.8 5.6 Claude Sonnet 4.5 —95.1 77.6 67.2 56.4 50.5 47.2 6.7 Claude Haiku 4.5 —96.5 72.2 61.3 49.8 42.5 37.8 6.5
> Open-Source Models (Baseline MDP)
> Kimi K2 1T 97.6 76.8 67.6 56.8 48.6 44.1 5.7 DeepSeek V3 671B 90.0 75.5 65.2 53.7 45.9 41.4 6.2 Mistral Large 3 123B 96.7 72.2 60.8 49.9 42.3 38.8 5.9 GPT-OSS 120B 120B 96.5 72.9 61.3 49.9 41.3 36.9 6.0 Minimax M2 230B 96.8 67.6 55.5 45.5 38.8 35.4 6.1 Qwen3 235B 235B 93.6 65.9 54.7 44.2 36.6 32.9 6.9
> Simpler Confidence-Triggering Alternatives (Claude Opus 4.6)
> + CoT-Ask-if-Unsure —97.5 80.6 71.5 63.0 55.6 52.0 5.5 + Self-Consistency ( N=3 )†—96.4 85.3 77.4 68.9 62.9 59.5 6.1 Claude Opus 4.6 + A CTION RATING (τ=10 )—97.8 87.2 82.0 75.2 69.5 67.0 5.4
> ∆vs. best baseline *** +7.9 +11.1 +13.4 +15.1 +16.2
> ∆vs. Self-Consistency +1.9 ns +4.6 *** +6.3 *** +6.6 *** +7.5 ***

Opportunistic clarification corrects mis-aligned trajectories. Table 12 further dissects opportunistic ISE by the agent’s traversal state at clarification time. Even when the agent was already on the correct HTS path, ISE is 83.6%, suggesting that on-path clarifications refine rather than derail correct trajectories. More tellingly, when the agent was off the correct path, where clarification must actively steer the agent back, ISE remains 67.3%. This argues against the confound that high aggre-gate ISE is driven purely by easy, already-correct cases: the clarification sub-agent appears to mean-ingfully correct misaligned trajectories. 

5.3 Threshold Sensitivity 

We do not tune τ on target benchmarks; instead we use threshold sweeps to characterize behavior on CBP-NY and lock τ =10 before any ATLAS or HSCodeComp evaluation. Treating τ as a be-havioral phase control in this analysis, sweeping it maps out a phase diagram of help-seeking structure (Table 10, Appendix L). The τ =50 →30 transition marks the clearest phase boundary (opportunistic rate: 9.7% →51.9%; accuracy: 51.2% →59.8%), corresponding to the onset of widespread oppor-tunistic mode activation. At τ =10 , 90.9% of records involve help-seeking (76.8% opportunis-tic), achieving 74% ISE at only 2.4 QA/record. Navigation steps are unchanged across all settings (5.4–5.7), indicating that gating alters where the agent seeks help, not how it navigates. The sweep was conducted on CBP-NY only; τ =10 was locked before any ATLAS or HSCodeComp evaluation (selection protocol in Appendix L). 

5.4 Separability: Help Localization vs. Answer Quality 

The regime shift and ISE improvement above are observed under controlled answers. The critical test is whether these patterns reflect the agent’s information-seeking ability or are artifacts of an-swer quality. A separability test (Table 2 in Ap-pendix C) replaces the controlled channel with fully-automated answers derived from the product description alone. 

Accuracy collapses; information-seeking pat-tern is preserved. ACTION RATING loses nearly all accuracy gain at 10-digit (67.0% → 48.2%) while the baseline is unaffected (50.8% → 49.2%): a −18.8% gap attributable to answer quality. Crucially, the information-seeking pattern itself (mandatory/opportunistic split, ISE ranking across thresholds) is preserved even when answer quality is degraded. 

Interpretation. The agent can locate states where reasoning needs help even when the an-swer source is weak; what it cannot do without a knowledgeable respondent is realize the down-stream accuracy benefit. This dissociation between localization and realization provides evidence that Figure 2: Clarification behavior on CBP-NY (n=1,181), Claude Opus 4.6. (a) QA Volume & ISE. Stacked bars: average QA per record, split by mode (orange: mandatory; green: opportunistic) and outcome (solid: effective; light: ineffective). Right axis: 10-digit accuracy (blue diamonds). Annotations above each bar: total QA/record and overall ISE (%). The τ =10 condition (outlined) shifts volume from mandatory to opportunistic while maximising accuracy. (b) ISE by Clarification Mode. Grouped bars compare mandatory (orange) vs. opportunistic (green) ISE at each threshold; at τ =10 , both reach ≈75%, while at τ =1 both drop to 62% (over-triggering). 

the two can be analyzed as separable factors un-der controlled degradation, with localization be-havior appearing more stable than realized accu-racy across answer-quality conditions. The behav-ioral signature additionally satisfies four validity criteria: stability (replicates across 4 LLM families and 3 benchmarks), interpretability (mandatory vs. opportunistic modes have clear semantic content), 

contrastiveness (three diagnostic contrasts fail to produce the same structure), and predictive local utility (ISE indicates that identified help states are productive at the one-step level). 

Knowledge-channel audit. We audit all 2,875 Q/A pairs from the CBP-NY run with action rating (τ =10 ) along two axes: six question categories (e.g., Material/Composition, Function/Use) and five answer types (Product Attribute, PA-Essential Character, Classification Criteria (CC), Unavail-able, Deflected). Table 3 shows the full cross-tabulation: 80% of answers are plain product at-tributes, and only 3.5% of questions (102 pairs) explicitly name an HTS chapter, heading, or note. Table 4 isolates this HTS-referencing subset: the guardrail deflects 34% outright; 37% yield plain product-attribute answers; and only 23 pairs (0.8% of all 2,875) reach a Classification Criteria answer (i.e., the oracle directly affirms or denies a named chapter note or heading criterion, such as “yes, it qualifies as rubber under Chapter 40, Note 1”). Ta-ble 5 then shows that even those 23 CC answers pro-duce lower navigation success than plain product-attribute answers (ISE 62.5% vs. 76.2%), arguing against oracle leakage as the main driver of the accuracy gain (Q&A examples and per-level break-down in Appendix D). Trajectory-level analysis (Appendix M) shows that the score gap between the top-ranked naviga-tion action and clarification narrows at deeper hier-archy levels, consistent with increasing local ambi-guity at finer classification granularity, while navi-gation steps and backtracking rates remain compa-rable to the baseline. 

5.5 Qualitative Clarification Behavior 

To illustrate what the two modes look like in prac-tice, we present representative examples from the CBP-NY evaluation. 

Mandatory clarification. For oval-shaped sugar confectionery cough drops containing 10 mg men-thol , the baseline agent commits to pharmaceuticals based on the dosage language (“10 mg per dose”). Under A CTION RATING , no navigation branch scores above τ at the Lv.2 node; need_clarify 

is top-ranked (score 68, next branch 31). The agent asks: “Is this product put up in measured doses or for retail sale as a medicament?” The answer (“No, this is sugar confectionery for retail consumption”) resolves the ambiguity, and the re-scored naviga-tion correctly routes to confectionery. 

Opportunistic clarification. For a granular copolymer: 69% butadiene, 20% methyl methacry-late, 9% methacrylic acid, 2% divinylbenzene , the agent’s top-ranked navigation action at Lv.3 is Figure 3: 10-digit accuracy vs. inference cost (LLM calls/sample). Every model improves with A CTION -RATING (gray arrows); simpler triggers (orange) do not reproduce the regime shift. Accuracy values are upper bounds under the controlled answer channel (product-owner simulation). 

“polymers of olefins” (score 72), but need_clarify 

appears at rank 2 (score 48, above τ =10 ). The question (“Is butadiene considered an olefin for classification purposes?”) targets a domain conven-tion: chemically, butadiene is a conjugated diene, but classification convention treats butadiene poly-mers as olefin polymers. The controlled answer confirms the convention; without it, the automated system applies strict chemistry and misroutes to “other resins.” 

Pattern. Mandatory questions tend to target miss-ing essential attributes (composition, primary use, form) at early levels where no branch is preferred, while opportunistic questions target fine-grained disambiguation (domain conventions, threshold values) at deeper levels where a leading branch ex-ists. The two modes capture structurally different information needs, not merely different confidence levels. 

6 Discussion 

Figure 3 shows that the behavioral signature is model-agnostic and that simpler triggers lie below the A CTION RATING Pareto frontier. We highlight three implications. 

Portability. The two-layer architecture separates domain instantiation (Layer 1: knowledge graph, classification protocols, answer channel) from the analysis protocol (Layer 2: shared ordinal scale, threshold policy, ISE, separability test). Layer 2 requires only a tree-structured action space with potential information gaps; candidate domains in-clude medical coding (ICD-10), product classifica-tion (CPC), and legal statute navigation. 

Cost–accuracy trade-off. ACTION RATING in-creases inference cost from 6.0 to 10.4 LLM calls per record (73% overhead), with the increase sub-linear in accuracy gain. Self-Consistency at N =3 

achieves +8.7% at 19 calls (3.2 × cost), placing it below the A CTION RATING Pareto frontier (Fig-ure 3). 

Toward realistic answer sources. The con-trolled answer channel is a clean measurement base-line. A natural next step is an answer-source ladder 

varying answer quality from the controlled chan-nel through retrieval and weaker LLMs to noisy human-like responses, to map how localization benefits degrade as answer quality decreases. The separability result (§5.4) predicts that information-seeking patterns remain stable across this ladder even as accuracy varies. 

Decomposing help-seeking. Separability moti-vates decomposing help-seeking into three factors: localization (where to ask), question quality (what to ask), and answer-source quality (who answers). This paper isolates the first. 

7 Conclusion 

ACTION RATING places clarification inside a lan-guage agent’s action space on a shared ordinal scale with navigation, yielding a self-gated mech-anism that requires no external uncertainty esti-mator. We frame the contribution as a measure-ment protocol for self-gated information-seeking behavior under a controlled answer channel, not a deployment system; reported accuracy gains are upper bounds. The framework reveals a regime shift from mandatory to opportunistic information-seeking (ISE: 50% →74%), stable across four LLM families, three benchmarks, and a range of thresh-olds, with the two modes serving distinct linguistic functions. Three diagnostic contrasts fail to repro-duce this structure, and a separability test ( −18.8% accuracy under degraded answers) supports an em-pirical separation between help localization and answer-source quality. Generalization beyond HTS and evaluation with realistic answer sources remain open directions. Limitations 

Controlled answer channel, not deployment. Ac-curacy numbers are upper bounds under a con-trolled answer channel; deployment with realis-tic information sources would yield lower gains. We do not yet systematically vary answer quality across intermediate regimes. 

Single domain. Evaluation covers three inde-pendent HTS benchmarks but generalization to structurally distinct taxonomies (ICD-10, CPC, le-gal statutes) requires re-implementing the domain layer. 

Action scores are not calibrated. ACTION -RATING assumes the LLM produces meaningful ordinal scores but does not claim calibrated con-fidence estimation (Guo et al., 2017; Xiong et al., 2024); τ may require re-tuning across models. 

Observational taxonomy. The manda-tory/opportunistic distinction is derived from the agent’s own ratings, not from ground-truth epis-temic states. 

Practical constraints. Opportunistic mode is-sues multiple inline QA rounds per step; latency may offset accuracy gains. Evaluation uses English-language descriptions only. 

Ethics Statement 

HTS classification has direct financial and regu-latory implications: incorrect codes can lead to improper duty assessment, and automation errors may have downstream financial or regulatory con-sequences. Our system is intended as a decision-support tool and should be validated by domain experts before deployment. The benchmark data is derived from publicly available CBP rulings and does not contain personally identifiable informa-tion. 

References 

Mohammad Aliannejadi, Hamed Zamani, Fabio Crestani, and W. Bruce Croft. 2019. Asking clar-ifying questions in open-domain information-seeking conversations. In Proceedings of the 42nd Interna-tional ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and De-velopment in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’19, page 475–484. ACM. Siddhartha Banerjee, Cem Akkaya, Francisco Perez-Sorrosal, and Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis. 2019. Hierar-chical transfer learning for multi-label text classifica-tion. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 6295–6300. Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Ger-stenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadom-ski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoefler. 2024. Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-lems. Dheeru Dua, Shivanshu Gupta, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. 2022. Successive prompting for decom-posing complex questions. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1251–1265. Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D. Hwang, Soumya Sanyal, Xiang Ren, Allyson Et-tinger, Zaïd Harchaoui, and Yejin Choi. 2024. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers on compositionality. Ran El-Yaniv and Yair Wiener. 2010. On the founda-tions of noise-free selective classification. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11:1605–1641. Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Gra-ham Neubig. 2023. Pal: Program-aided language models. Yonatan Geifman and Ran El-Yaniv. 2017. Selective classification for deep neural networks. Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Wein-berger. 2017. On calibration of modern neural net-works. In Proceedings of the 34th International Con-ference on Machine Learning , pages 1321–1330. Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu. 2023. Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. Ronald A Howard. 1966. Information value theory. 

IEEE Transactions on systems science and cybernet-ics , 2(1):22–26. Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xiny-ing Song, and Denny Zhou. 2024. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. Carlos N. Silla Jr. and Alex A. Freitas. 2011. A survey of hierarchical classification across different applica-tion domains. Data Mining and Knowledge Discov-ery , 22(1):31–72. Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tyre, Zhaowei Zhu, Liane Lovitt, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Jared Ka-plan, Chris Olah, Dario Amodei, and Tom Brown. 2022. Language models (mostly) know what they know. Amita Kamath, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2020. Se-lective question answering under domain shift. In 

Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5684– 5696. Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2023. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. Kamran Kowsari, Donald E. Brown, Mojtaba Hei-darysafa, Kiana Jafari Meimandi, Matthew S. Gerber, and Laura E. Barnes. 2017. Hdltex: Hierarchical deep learning for text classification. Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. 2023. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for un-certainty estimation in natural language generation. Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2024. Let’s verify step by step. Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in words. Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Ao-han Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. 2023. Agent-bench: Evaluating llms as agents. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdan-bakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Yuning Mao, Jingjing Tian, Jiawei Han, and Xiang Ren. 2019. Hierarchical text classification with reinforced label assignment. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) ,page 445–455. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David Biber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Augustus Odena. 2021. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen Chen, Ji-apu Wang, and Xindong Wu. 2024. Unifying large language models and knowledge graphs: A roadmap. Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A. Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. Martin L. Puterman. 1994. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming . John Wiley & Sons, New York. Hossein A. Rahmani, Xi Wang, Yue Feng, Qiang Zhang, Emine Yilmaz, and Aldo Lipani. 2023. A survey on asking clarification questions datasets in conversa-tional systems. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , pages 2698–2716. Howard Raiffa and Robert Schlaifer. 1961. Applied Sta-tistical Decision Theory . Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. Sudha Rao and Hal Daumé III. 2018. Learning to ask good questions: Ranking clarification questions us-ing neural expected value of perfect information. In 

Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 2737– 2746. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2024. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 36. Burr Settles. 2012. Active learning . Morgan & Clay-pool Publishers. Kazuya Shimura, Jiyi Li, and Fumiyo Fukumoto. 2018. HFT-CNN: Learning hierarchical category structure for multi-label short text categorization. In Proceed-ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 811–816, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ash-win Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal rein-forcement learning. Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. 2024. Cognitive architec-tures for language agents. U.S. Customs and Border Protection. 2025a. 2025 HTS Revision 26. https://www.usitc.gov/2025_hts_ revision_26 . Accessed: 2025-01-01. U.S. Customs and Border Protection. 2025b. Customs Rulings Online Search System (CROSS). https: //rulings.cbp.gov/home . Accessed: 2025-01-01. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023a. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. Zekun Wang, Ge Zhang, Kexin Yang, Ning Shi, Wangchunshu Zhou, Shaochun Hao, Guangzheng Xiong, Yizhi Li, Mong Yuan Sim, Xiuying Chen, Qingqing Zhu, Zhenzhu Yang, Adam Nik, Qi Liu, Chenghua Lin, Shi Wang, Ruibo Liu, Wenhu Chen, Ke Xu, Dayiheng Liu, Yike Guo, and Jie Fu. 2023b. Interactive natural language processing. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. 2024. Can llms express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms. Yiqian Yang, Tian Lan, Qianghuai Jia, Li Zhu, Hui Jiang, Hang Zhu, Longyue Wang, Weihua Luo, and Kaifu Zhang. 2025. Hscodecomp: A realistic and expert-level benchmark for deep search agents in hierarchical rule application. Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023a. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. Pritish Yuvraj and Siva Devarakonda. 2025. Atlas: Benchmarking and adapting llms for global trade via harmonized tariff code classification. Hamed Zamani, Susan Dumais, Nick Craswell, Paul Bennett, and Gord Lueck. 2020. Generating clarify-ing questions for information retrieval. In Proceed-ings of The Web Conference 2020 , pages 418–428. Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah D. Goodman. 2022. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. 2024. Lan-guage agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and planning in language models. Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. 2023. Least-to-most prompting enables complex rea-soning in large language models. Jie Zhou, Chunping Ma, Dingkun Long, Guangwei Xu, Ning Ding, Haoyu Zhang, Pengjun Xie, and Gong-shen Liu. 2020. Hierarchy-aware global model for hierarchical text classification. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 1106–1117. Appendix Roadmap 

The appendix is organized to support specific reviewer questions rather than to extend the main argument. App. A provides formal sanity checks (threshold-policy single-crossing condition, bounded reentry) and a worked example of the self-gated cycle. App. B documents the knowl-edge graph and classification protocols underlying CBP-NY. App. C–D audit the controlled answer channel and argue against oracle leakage as the primary driver of accuracy. App. E–G cover MDP component ablations and the diagnostic-contrast baselines (CoT-Ask-if-Unsure, Self-Consistency). 

App. J–K report multi-model and cross-benchmark transfer under the locked τ =10 protocol. App. L– M present threshold sensitivity and trajectory-level mechanism analysis. App. O–P.3 release dataset-construction and full prompt templates for repro-ducibility. 

A Formal Properties and Proofs 

A.1 Worked Example of the Self-Gated Reentry Cycle 

Figure 4 traces a single record through the self-gated reentry cycle on a CBP-NY example, illus-trating how clarification competes with navigation on a shared ordinal scale rather than being exter-nally triggered. 

Top-down traversal. The agent enters the root of the HTS tree and scores every candidate action— each child branch as well as need_clarify —on the shared [0 , 100] scale. At the 2-digit and 4-digit levels (left panel), one navigation branch domi-nates, so the agent commits without invoking the clarification action. This corresponds to the stan-dard hierarchical decoding regime: the rating layer is active at every step, but the gating condition is not met. 

Reentry loop at the 8-digit node. Descent stalls at the 8-digit node (dashed box), where no sin-gle branch exceeds the others by a clear margin and clarify rises to score 45, above τ =10 . This triggers the reentry loop: a clarification sub-agent generates a question, queries the controlled answer channel, and the resulting ⟨Q, A ⟩ pair is appended to the observation. The agent then re-scores all actions at the same node with the augmented con-text (right panel, Round 2). The clarification action drops, and the leading traverse action now dom-inates at ≥ 92 , allowing the agent to commit and continue toward the 10-digit leaf. 

Why this matters for measurement. The two-round score trace exposes the behavioral object the rest of the paper measures: a state where clarifi-cation temporarily out-competes navigation, the agent acts on that signal, and a re-scored naviga-tion step follows. Mode taxonomy (mandatory vs. opportunistic) is read from the rank structure of the first round; ISE is read from whether the post-injection action is correct. Without the shared-scale rating, none of these quantities is observable from the trace alone. 

A.2 Threshold-Policy Sanity Check (Theorem 1) Scope. This subsection states a sufficient con-dition under which a threshold policy on q(s) is optimal within the threshold family. We do not 

assume LLM-emitted scores satisfy this condition; the result is a conceptual sanity check rather than an empirical guarantee. 

Setup. Let S be the set of decision states encoun-tered by the navigator, and let q(s) ∈ R be the agent’s rating assigned to the clarification action at state s. Define the net downstream gain of clarifi-cation :

∆( s) := V ask (s) − V act (s),

where V ask (s) is the expected downstream return from clarifying before acting, and V act (s) is the expected downstream return from acting immedi-ately. For a threshold τ , define the clarification policy πτ (s) = 1{q(s) ≥ τ }, with expected utility 

U (τ ) := E∆( s) 1{q(s) ≥ τ }.

Proposition 1 (Monotonicity of trigger sets) . For 

Aτ := {s : q(s) ≥ τ } and any τ1 < τ 2, we have Aτ2 ⊆ Aτ1 . Hence lowering the threshold can only add clarification-triggered states, and any nonnegative clarification-cost functional is weakly decreasing in τ .

Assumption A (Single-crossing conditional gain). Let m(t) := E[∆( s) | q(s)= t]. Assume m is integrable and there exists τ ⋆ such that m(t) ≤ 0

for t < τ ⋆ and m(t) ≥ 0 for t ≥ τ ⋆.

Theorem 1 (Optimal threshold under single cross-ing) . Under Assumption A, the threshold τ ⋆ maxi-mizes U (τ ) over the threshold family {πτ }τ .root                                                 

> 2-d
> 4-d
> 6-d
> 8-d
> 10-d
> 1. RATE 2. ASK 3. ANSWER 4. CHECK
> Qindoor? Aindoor
> terminal
> Top-down traversal. At the 8-d node , the clarify score crosses and a re-entry loop fi res: rate
> ask answer re-rate , after which the agent commits to the 10-d terminal.
> Hierarchical traversal
> Two rounds of action rating trajectory: ROOT Lv.1 Lv.2 Lv.3 Lv.4
> Round 1 Initial scoring — clarify > no yet
> traverse(code A) 75
> clarify 45
> traverse(code B) 35
> jump(code C) 20
> backtrack(code D) 5
> clarify — ask question, inject answer, re-score
> Clari fi cation sub-agent mimics human-in-the-loop
> QIs the item designed for indoor or outdoor use?
> AIndoor only — the product spec con fi rms residential use.
> Round 2 After clari fi cation con fi dent injected
> traverse(code A) 92
> jump(code C) 25
> clarify 8
> traverse(code B) 5
> traverse(code A) = 92 →executed clarify , not retriggered
> Action gating @ Lv.4 node

Figure 4: Self-gated clarification cycle within hierarchical taxonomy navigation. Left: Top-down traversal of the taxonomy tree. At each internal node the agent scores all candidate actions, including need_clarify , on a shared 

[0 , 100] ordinal scale. When the clarification score exceeds threshold τ at the 8-digit node (dashed box), the agent enters a reentry loop : a sub-agent resolves the query and injects ⟨Q, A ⟩ before re-scoring. Right: Two rounds of action rating. Round 1: clarify scores 45 ( > τ ), triggering the sub-agent. Round 2: after answer injection the leading traverse action dominates ( ≥ 92 ); the episode terminates at the 10-digit leaf via confirm .

A.3 Bounded Reentry Bounded reentry (stated in §3.3). Each node v

permits at most C clarifications (duplicate guard). Let Vep be the set of nodes visited during the episode. The total number of clarification events is bounded by Nclarify ≤ C · |V ep |. Each clar-ification incurs exactly 2 additional LLM calls (one sub-agent call + one reentry re-selection), so clarification adds at most 2Nclarify calls. Nav-igation actions are bounded by H (the episode step limit). Therefore the total call count satis-fies Ntotal ≤ H + 2 C|V ep |, which is finite since 

|V ep | ≤ H (each navigation step visits at most one new node). In our implementation, C = 2 and 

H = 20 , giving Ntotal ≤ 20 + 4 · 20 = 100 .

Proof of Proposition 1. By definition, Aτ = {s :

q(s) ≥ τ }. For τ1 < τ2, if s ∈ Aτ2 then 

q(s) ≥ τ2 > τ 1, so s ∈ Aτ1 . Therefore Aτ2 ⊆ Aτ1 .For any nonnegative c(s) ≥ 0, the inclusion im-plies 1{q(s) ≥ τ2} ≤ 1{q(s) ≥ τ1} for all 

s, so E[c(s) 1{q(s) ≥ τ2}] ≤ E[c(s) 1{q(s) ≥

τ1}].

Proof of Theorem 1. Let X = q(s). By the law of iterated expectation, 

U (τ ) = E∆( s) 1{X ≥ τ }

= Em(X) 1{X ≥ τ },

where m(t) := E[∆( s) | q(s)= t].

Case 1: τ < τ ⋆. Then 

U (τ ⋆)−U (τ ) = −Em(X) 1{τ ≤X<τ ⋆} ≥ 0,

because m(X) ≤ 0 on {X < τ ⋆} by Assump-tion A. 

Case 2: τ > τ ⋆. Then 

U (τ ⋆)−U (τ ) = Em(X) 1{τ ⋆≤X<τ } ≥ 0,

because m(X) ≥ 0 on {X ≥ τ ⋆} by Assump-tion A. Thus U (τ ⋆) ≥ U (τ ) for every τ , establishing optimality. 

Corollary 2 (Selective clarification can outper-form both extremes) . Under Assumption A, if there exist both positive-gain and negative-gain clarification states with nonzero probability (i.e. 

P(∆( s) > 0, q(s) ≥ τ ⋆) > 0 and P(∆( s) <

0, q (s) < τ ⋆) > 0), then U (τ ⋆) > U (+ ∞) = 0 

and U (τ ⋆) > U (−∞ ) = E[∆( s)] .Proof. The no-clarification policy gives 

U (+ ∞) = 0 . Since m(X) ≥ 0 on {X ≥ τ ⋆}

with strict positivity on a subset of positive mea-sure, U (τ ⋆) = E[m(X) 1{X ≥ τ ⋆}] > 0. The always-clarify policy gives U (−∞ ) = E[∆( s)] .Then 

U (−∞ ) − U (τ ⋆) = Em(X) 1{X<τ ⋆}.

Because m(X) ≤ 0 on {X < τ ⋆} with strict negativity on a subset of positive measure, the right-hand side is strictly negative, so U (τ ⋆) > U (−∞ ).

Interpretation. This corollary formalizes a sim-ple intuition: some states benefit from clarification, while others do not. A policy that asks everywhere pays unnecessary clarification cost, whereas a pol-icy that never asks forgoes high-value interventions. A threshold policy can improve over both by selec-tively retaining only those states whose expected clarification gain is nonnegative. 

B Knowledge Graph Construction 

We represent the HTS as an augmented directed graph G = ( V, E T ∪ ER) constructed from the official USITC HTS 2025 Revision 26 data (U.S. Customs and Border Protection, 2025a), where 

|V | = 30 ,202 nodes span five hierarchical levels (chapter → heading → subheading → tariff item 

→ statistical suffix). 

Node structure. Each node v ∈ V stores struc-tured classification metadata: 

v = {code , description , guidance ,

parent , children , excludes , ϕ v}

where guidance is a concise classification hint gen-erated by an LLM (see below), and ϕv ∈ { 0, 1}3

are protocol indicators :

ϕv = {is_other , is_parts , is_set }

These partition nodes into three categories requir-ing distinct reasoning patterns: (i) catch-all “other” categories ( |{ v : ϕother  

> v

=1 }| = 7 ,274 ; 24% of nodes), (ii) parts/accessories classifications ( |{ v :

ϕparts  

> v

=1 }| = 864 ; 3%), which require validat-ing functional relationships to parent systems, and (iii) composite goods/sets ( |{ v : ϕset  

> v

=1 }| = 137 ;0.5%), which require essential-character analysis under GRI Rule 3. 

Edge structure. The edge set comprises two disjoint types: tree edges ET = {(vp, v c) :

vc ∈ children (vp)} and relational edges ER =

EX ∪ ES ∪ EP . EX holds explicit exclu-sion edges extracted from chapter and section notes ( |EX | = 2 ,847 ); ES captures implicit sib-ling mutual-exclusivity constraints; EP encodes parts-to-parent-system relationships; each parts node stores parent_system , parent_hts , and 

relationship_type to enable cross-heading vali-dation jumps. This hybrid topology supports three navigation modes: (i) hierarchical descent via ET ,(ii) cross-chapter jumps via EX when exclusions apply, and (iii) protocol-specific traversals via ES

and EP for validation. 

LLM-guided node guidance generation. The raw HTS descriptions are often terse legal text. For each node we prompt an LLM to produce a short ( ≤3 sentence) guidance field that (a) para-phrases the tariff description in plain language, (b) lists distinguishing product attributes (mate-rial, use, form), and (c) flags any applicable ex-clusion cross-references from the node’s chapter notes. This guidance is injected into the agent’s observation at each step, providing domain context without requiring the agent to reason over raw legal prose. 

C Oracle Ablation: Human-in-the-Loop vs. Automated 

Table 2: Oracle Ablation Study: impact of removing HTS description and reasoning traces from the clar-ification sub-agent. Oracle = sub-agent has ground-truth access (upper bound); Ablated = no oracle data (leakage-free). ∆ = oracle −ablated accuracy drop. ISE = fraction of QA interactions after which the agent’s next traversal step lands on the correct HTS path (§5.2). Significance assessed by non-parametric paired bootstrap ( nboot =5 ,000 ): ∗∗∗ 95 % CI strictly positive; ns CI includes zero. † AR (oracle) signif-icantly outperforms Base (oracle) at all digit levels (∗∗∗ ); AR (ablated) does not significantly outperform Base (ablated) ( ns , e.g. 10d: −1.0 % [ −5.0, +3 .0]). The interaction ( +17 .2 % [ +11 .8, +22 .9], ∗∗∗ ) confirms or-acle data is necessary for AR’s gains. AR (ablated) issues more QA steps than the oracle condition (3,312 vs. 2,883) yet at substantially lower ISE (56.2 vs. 73.7), explaining why AR (ablated) accuracy collapses to near Base (ablated).                                                              

> Condition Succ. 2d 4d 6d 8d 10d Steps LLM calls ISE
> With oracle data (upper bound)
> Base (oracle) 97.3 79.3 70.9 61.8 54.4 50.8 5.59 6.0 49.9 AR (oracle)† 97.8 87.2 82.0 75.2 69.5 67.0 5.44 10.1 73.7
> Without oracle data (leakage-free)
> Base (ablated) 97.5 79.6 70.5 60.3 52.5 49.2 5.61 5.9 44.2 AR (ablated)† 98.2 79.4 70.5 60.0 52.3 48.2 5.42 10.8 56.2
> ∆Base ns −0.2 −0.3 +0.5 +1.5 +1.9 +1.7 +5.7
> ∆AR ∗∗∗ −0.4 +7.8 +11.5 +15.2 +17.2 +18.8 +17.5

In the intended deployment, a knowledgeable human (product owner, importer, or customs bro-ker) answers clarification questions about their own product. The oracle condition in our experiments simulates this: the clarification sub-agent has ac-cess to the item’s authoritative ruling record, en-abling it to provide confirmed product attributes that a real product owner would know (material composition, intended function, manufacturing method, physical specifications). The ablated con-dition removes all ruling access, forcing the sub-agent to answer from the product description alone, simulating fully-automated operation with no priv-ileged answer source. Two guardrails are in place throughout: clarification questions are restricted to product-attribute queries, and any taxonomy-related text in answers is masked before reaching the navigator. 

ISE as the diagnostic lens. The ISE column in Table 2 makes the mechanism legible at a glance. For Base , ablation drops ISE by only 5.7% (49.9 

→ 44.2): Base asks few clarification questions and does not depend heavily on answer quality, so de-graded answers have little effect. For AR , ablation drops ISE by 17.5% (73.7 → 56.2): AR’s inline clarification loop is tightly coupled to answer qual-ity, so degraded answers cascade into navigation errors. 

More questions, worse outcomes. AR (ablated) actually issues more QA steps than AR (oracle) (3,312 vs. 2,883, a 15% increase), yet converts only 56.2% into correct navigation steps compared with 73.7% for the oracle condition. The result is that AR (ablated) accuracy (48.2% at 10-digit) collapses to near Base (ablated) (49.2%), erasing the +18.8% gap entirely. This is not a flaw in the design: it confirms that oracle quality is precisely what makes the clarification loop effective, and the ablation directly measures that dependence. The gap therefore reflects domain expertise, not path leakage (see §5.4 and Appendix D). 

Case Study: Same Question, Different Answers 

The four examples below illustrate why the guardrails are insufficient to close the gap. In each case, both conditions ask the same question; both answers contain no taxonomy codes; yet the an-swers are factually contradictory, leading to differ-ent classification outcomes. 

Example 1: Cough drops, “medicament” vs. “confectionery.” Product : Oval-shaped sugar confectionery cough drops containing 10 mg men-thol with capsicum, eucalyptus oil, natural licorice. 

Question : “whether product is put up in measured doses or for retail sale as medicament.” 

Oracle (human): “No, this product is not put up in measured doses or for retail sale as a medicament. It is a sugar confectionery cough drop ready for consumption.” → correct .

Ablated (automated): “Yes, this product is pack-aged for retail as a medicament. The lozenges are labeled as a cough suppressant containing 10 mg menthol per dose.” → sent to pharmaceuticals .The product description is legitimately ambigu-ous: “10 mg menthol per dose” is consistent with both a confectionery and a medicament framing. The human owner knows their product is candy; the automated system infers medicament from the dosage language. 

Example 2: Novelty umbrella, “functional” vs. “decorative.” Product : Hand-held umbrella with telescopic shaft, metal frame, nylon fabric shaped like a bird or animal; marketed as a sporting ac-cessory or novelty item. Question : “whether the umbrella functions as an actual rain umbrella or is purely decorative/toy.” 

Oracle (human): “Yes, this is a functional um-brella capable of providing rain protection despite its novelty design.” → correct .

Ablated (automated): “No, it is marketed as a sporting accessory or novelty item, not for rain pro-tection.” → sent to miscellaneous textile, adding 3 extra navigation steps .

Example 3: Artificial amaryllis flower, essential character. Product : Polyester and rayon amaryl-lis flower with thermoplastic coating, assembled by gluing. Question : “whether plastic coating or textile substrate gives essential character.” 

Oracle (human): “The plastic coating gives the essential character.” → correct (plastic artificial flowers) .

Ablated (automated): “The textile base gives the essential character, as the flower petals are made from nonwoven fabric.” → sent to textile artificial flowers .This is a GRI 3(b) essential-character determi-nation, one of the most judgment-dependent ques-tions in taxonomy classification. Both answers are plausible readings of the product description; the oracle resolves the ambiguity correctly because it has ruling context. 

Example 4: Synthetic copolymer, domain interpretation. Product : Granular copolymer: 69% butadiene, 20% methyl methacrylate, 9% methacrylic acid, 2% divinylbenzene. Question :“whether butadiene is considered an olefin.” 

Oracle (human): “Yes, butadiene is an olefin; the product is a polymer of olefins with butadiene as the primary component at 69%.” → correct .

Ablated (automated): “No, butadiene is a diene with two double bonds, whereas olefins have a single double bond.” → sent to other resins .Technically, both answers are chemically defen-sible: butadiene is a conjugated diene, not a simple alkene. However, classification conventions treat butadiene polymers as polymers of olefins. The au-tomated system applies strict chemistry; the oracle applies domain convention. No product-attribute guardrail can resolve this because the dispute is about chemistry, not codes. 

Summary 

All four examples pass both guardrails (no code references in questions; no codes in answers), yet the answers are factually contradictory. The human advantage is not about seeing taxonomy codes; it is about resolving genuine product ambiguity that only the product owner or a domain expert can definitively settle: (1) genuine product ambiguity 

(Examples 1–2), where the description is legiti-mately ambiguous; (2) essential-character judg-ment (Example 3), where GRI 3(b) requires a sub-jective call only the owner can make; and (3) do-main interpretation (Example 4), where classifi-cation conventions diverge from scientific defini-tions. The 255 products that only A CTION RAT -

ING +human classifies correctly represent cases in this regime. 

D Knowledge-Channel Audit 

To validate the claim that the controlled answer channel primarily conveys product-owner knowl-edge rather than classification-path leakage, we audit all 2,875 Q/A pairs generated during the CBP-NY evaluation ( τ =10 , Claude Opus 4.6, N =1 ,181 

records) using a cross-tabulation of question cate-gory against answer type, and measure post-QA navigation effectiveness (ISE) for each answer type. 

HTS-referencing question analysis 

Of the 2,875 Q/A pairs, 102 (3.5%) explicitly ref-erence an HTS chapter, heading, or tariff note. Tables 3 and 4 cross-tabulate question category against answer type for the full corpus and for this HTS-referencing subset respectively. Table 5 mea-sures post-QA navigation effectiveness (ISE) by answer type. 

Answer-type definitions. 

• PA (Product Attribute): a factual product prop-erty directly answerable from the product descrip-

Table 3: Cross-tabulation: Question category × An-swer type (n=2 ,875 unique Q/A pairs). Each cell shows count and row percentage. PA = Product At-tribute; PA-EC = Product Attribute (Essential Charac-ter); CC = Classification Criteria; N/A = Unavailable; 

Dfl = Deflected by guardrail.                                                      

> Question Category PA PA-EC CC N/A Dfl Total
> Material/Composition 810 (76%) 35 (3%) 10 (1%) 210 (20%) 5 (0%) 1070 Feature Presence/Absence 533 (85%) 25 (4%) 6 (1%) 45 (7%) 20 (3%) 629 Function/Use 353 (92%) 13 (3%) 0 (0%) 15 (4%) 1 (0%) 382 Physical Form/Processing 304 (85%) 8 (2%) 3 (1%) 41 (12%) 0 (0%) 356 Dimensions/Measurements 115 (73%) 2 (1%) 0 (0%) 41 (26%) 0 (0%) 158 Other 189 (68%) 29 (10%) 4 (1%) 38 (14%) 20 (7%) 280
> Total 2304 (80%) 112 (4%) 23 (1%) 390 (14%) 46 (2%) 2875

Table 4: Cross-tabulation: Question category ×

Answer type for HTS-referencing questions only 

(n=102 , 3.5% of all 2,875 pairs). Questions explic-itly naming a chapter, heading, or tariff note. PA =Product Attribute; PA-EC = PA (Essential Character); 

CC = Classification Criteria; N/A = Unavailable; Dfl =Deflected by guardrail.                                                      

> Question Category PA PA-EC CC N/A Dfl Total
> Material/Composition 16 (53%) 1 (3%) 10 (33%) 1 (3%) 2 (7%) 30 Feature Presence/Absence 10 (31%) 1 (3%) 6 (19%) 1 (3%) 14 (44%) 32 Function/Use 5 (83%) ———1 (17%) 6Physical Form/Processing 5 (56%) 1 (11%) 3 (33%) ——9Dimensions/Measurements 1 (100%) ————1Other 1 (4%) —4 (17%) 1 (4%) 18 (75%) 24
> Total 38 (37%) 3(3%) 23 (23%) 3(3%) 35 (34%) 102
> 35 (34%) deflected; 41 (40%) product attribute; 23 (23%) classification criteria; 3 (3%) unavailable.

tion, with no reference to HTS structure. The default category (80% of all answers). • PA-EC (Essential Character): the oracle’s an-swer invokes GRI 3(b) to identify which com-ponent of a composite product determines its classification. • CC (Classification Criteria): the oracle directly affirms or denies a named chapter note, section note, or heading criterion (e.g., “yes, it qualifies as rubber under Chapter 40, Note 1”). Occurs in only 0.8% of all pairs; limited to questions that name the HTS provision. • N/A (Unavailable): the product description does not contain the requested information; the agent must navigate without it. • Dfl (Deflected): the guardrail blocks the ques-tion because it asks for a legal/trade determina-tion rather than a product attribute. All deflected answers cluster around contentious tariff notes (Section VI Additional U.S. Note 3, Section XI Note 9). 

Outcome examples for HTS-referencing ques-tions. Deflected (35/102, 34.3%): guardrail cor-rectly blocks tariff-framed questions. • Q: “Whether maltitol is classified as sugar under chapter 17 additional notes.” Table 5: ISE by oracle answer type. ISE = frac-tion of QA interactions after which the agent’s next 

traverse_child lands on the correct HTS path (§5.2); QA steps with no subsequent traverse_child before the next interruption count as ineffective, matching the paper’s ISE denominator. Classification Criteria (CC) answers yield lower ISE than plain product-attribute answers (62.5% vs. 76.2%), contradicting the oracle-leakage hypothesis. Deflected answers (guardrail-blocked HTS queries) have the lowest ISE (19.1%), con-firming the guardrail correctly withholds path-revealing information.               

> Answer Type QA Steps ISE
> Product Attribute (PA) 2,272 76.2% Product Attribute (EC) 113 85.0% Classification Criteria (CC) 24 62.5% Unavailable 423 64.1% Deflected (guardrail) 47 19.1%
> All 2,879 73.7%

A: “This is a legal/trade determination, not a prod-uct attribute question.” • Q: “Whether sugars qualify under additional U.S. note 3 to chapter 17.” A: “You’re right, I apologize for the confusion. Let me ask a more appropriate question. . . ” 

Product Attribute (38/102, 37.3%): question uses HTS framing but oracle answers the underlying product fact. • Q: “Whether grape variety blends should be clas-sified as grape juice or mixtures under HTS.” A: “This product is a mixture of juices. It blends three different grape varieties. . . ” • Q: “Whether the product is considered aromatic for tariff purposes.” A: “Yes, this product is aromatic. The benzyl group contains a benzene ring. . . ” 

Classification Criteria (23/102, 22.5%): oracle confirms a chapter or note criterion directly. • Q: “Whether fabric meets note 9 to section XI criteria.” A: “No, this fabric does not meet those crite-ria. The product contains 60.20% plastics by weight. . . ” • Q: “Whether product falls within heading 4202 scope.” A: “Yes, this product falls within the scope of travel goods. . . ” 

Unavailable (3/102, 2.9%): oracle cannot answer even an HTS-framed question. • Q: “Whether gowns are specifically made of non-woven fabric (heading 5603).” 

Table 6: MDP component ablation (Claude Opus 4.6, 

N =1181 , no A CTION RATING ). ∆: 10-digit accuracy change vs. the full baseline navigator.                                                                  

> Succ. Hierarchical Accuracy (%) Configuration (%) 2d 4d 6d 8d 10d Steps ∆
> Full Model 97.3 79.3 70.9 61.8 54.4 50.8 5.6 —
> Action Ablation
> w/o Clarify 98.1 78.3 69.0 59.1 51.2 46.9 5.2 −3.9
> w/o Jump 98.5 78.3 68.7 58.7 50.2 47.0 5.7 −3.8
> w/o Backtrack 97.7 78.9 69.9 61.0 53.6 49.9 5.6 −0.9
> Protocol Ablation
> w/o Other Protocol 98.0 77.6 68.5 59.5 51.7 48.5 5.8 −2.3
> w/o Parts Protocol 97.5 78.5 69.6 60.8 53.2 49.6 5.7 −1.2
> w/o Sets Protocol 97.9 79.4 70.9 61.9 54.4 50.9 5.7 0.0

A: “The specific material composition is not doc-umented in the product records. . . ” 

Interpretation. The guardrail handles 34% of HTS-framed questions outright. Of the remainder, most (37%) are redirected to a product-fact answer that contains no classification reasoning. Only 23 questions (22.5% of HTS-referencing, 0.8% of all 2,875) receive a Classification Criteria answer; and as shown in Table 5, even those still lead to wrong navigation 24% of the time (ISE 62.5% vs. 76.2% for plain product-attribute answers). The pattern confirms that the +18.8% accuracy gap reflects domain expertise, not classification-path leakage. 

E MDP Framework Validation 

Table 6 validates the MDP framework design by ab-lating each action and protocol from the full naviga-tor (without A CTION RATING , to isolate framework contributions). 

Information gathering and cross-tree naviga-tion are the most impactful components. Remov-ing clarify (−3.9%) and jump (−3.8%) causes the largest drops, confirming that the MDP’s ability to seek information and navigate across taxonomy branches is essential. Among protocols, the “other” catch-all protocol contributes most ( −2.3%), re-flecting the difficulty of reasoning about residual categories. 

Domain protocols have asymmetric value. 

Among the three GRI-specific protocols, the catch-all “other” protocol contributes most ( −2.3%). HTS headings frequently end with an other/NESOI 

node (“not elsewhere specified or included”) that acts as a residual bin; without dedicated han-dling, the agent conflates genuine residuals with classification errors. The parts protocol, which routes component and accessory classification to the parent heading under GRI 1, contributes a smaller but meaningful −1.2%. The sets proto-col, which applies GRI 3(b) essential-character analysis for composite goods, shows no marginal effect. Together, the protocol ablations confirm that taxonomy-specific reasoning rules must be ex-plicitly encoded in the MDP state transitions, and cannot be left to the LLM’s implicit knowledge. 

F CoT-Ask-if-Unsure Baseline 

CoT-Ask-if-Unsure is the simplest possible prompt-ing alternative: a single sentence is appended to the standard navigation prompt instructing the agent to ask a clarification question when uncertain: 

“If you are uncertain about which action to take, ask a clarification question be-fore selecting an action.” 

No scoring function, threshold, or sampling is involved. At each navigation step, the agent either (a) selects a navigation action as usual, or (b) marks the step as uncertain ( unsure=True ) and emits a clarification question before committing to an ac-tion. If a clarification question is issued, it is routed to the clarification sub-agent identically to the in-line clarification mechanism used by A CTION RAT -

> ING

; the answer is appended to the product con-text and the agent re-selects its action. This cor-responds to enabling cot_ask_if_unsure=True 

and enable_inline_clarify=True in the naviga-tor configuration, with no action rating. The key difference from A CTION RATING is the absence of an explicit ordinal action-rating signal: the agent relies entirely on its own instruction-following to decide when to ask, rather than com-puting a scored gap between candidate actions. CoT-Ask-if-Unsure therefore tests whether struc-tured action-rating (the scoring step) is necessary, or whether a prompt-level uncertainty instruction suffices to trigger useful information seeking. 

G Self-Consistency Action Selection 

At each navigation step t with state st, the self-consistency (SC) method estimates action uncer-tainty through repeated sampling rather than ex-plicit confidence scoring. Formally, SC draws N

independent action samples from the policy at tem-perature T = 1 :

a(i) ∼ π(· | st), i = 1 , . . . , N 

For each action a ∈ A , the vote count is: 

v(a) = 

> N

X

> i=1

1a(i) = a

The selected action is determined by majority vote: 

a∗ = arg max  

> a∈A

; v(a)

with ties broken by the order of first occurrence among the N samples. The agreement score and entropy proxy are computed as: 

α(st) = 1

N max  

> a∈A

v(a),H(st) = − X 

> a:v(a)>0

v(a)

N log v(a)

N

where α(st) ∈ [1 /N, 1] and H(st) ∈ [0 , log N ].A step is considered uncertain when α(st) <αthresh , equivalently when H(st) > 0 under the unanimous agreement criterion ( αthresh = 1 .0). In all experiments we use N = 3 and αthresh = 1 .0,so any disagreement among the three samples con-stitutes uncertainty; the majority-vote action is exe-cuted regardless. SC incurs exactly N LLM calls per navigation step, giving a total inference cost of N · H calls per episode where H is the number of navigation steps, compared to H + 2 |C| for ActionRating, where |C| 

is the number of clarification events (each incurring one sub-agent call and one reentry call). 

H Extended Related Work 

LLM agents for structured reasoning. Re-Act (Yao et al., 2023b) interleaves reasoning traces with tool calls in flat action spaces; Tree-of-Thoughts (Yao et al., 2023a) and LATS (Zhou et al., 2024) add search over branching thought struc-tures; Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) introduces verbal self-reflection after episode-level failures; Toolformer (Schick et al., 2024) teaches models when to invoke external APIs; AgentBench (Liu et al., 2023) benchmarks agents across diverse en-vironments; and Cognitive Architectures (Sumers et al., 2024) provide a unifying framework for agent design. All these operate over flat or lightly struc-tured action spaces. None addresses the specific challenge of deep hierarchical taxonomies where each step narrows the search space irreversibly. Self-evaluation and uncertainty. Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2023a) uses sampling-based agreement as a proxy for confidence; Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023) iterates on outputs via self-critique; process reward mod-els (Cobbe et al., 2021; Lightman et al., 2024) train verifiers to score intermediate steps; and LLM-as-Judge (Zheng et al., 2023) evaluates outputs via prompted comparison. Calibration studies (Kadavath et al., 2022; Kuhn et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2017; Xiong et al., 2024) examine whether model-expressed confidence correlates with correctness. These methods rate final answers or sample agreement; our mechanism rates candidate actions , including clarification, on a shared ordinal scale, so that clarification competes directly with navigation rather than being triggered by final-answer confidence or sampling disagreement. 

Information seeking and clarification. Active learning (Settles, 2012) selects queries to maxi-mize model improvement; interactive NLP (Wang et al., 2023b) and conversational search (Alianne-jadi et al., 2019; Zamani et al., 2020; Rao and III, 2018; Rahmani et al., 2023) study when and what to ask. Prior work assumes external uncertainty estimators or human interlocutors; our mechanism is entirely self-gated from the agent’s own action ratings. 

Selective prediction and abstention. Selective prediction (Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2017; El-Yaniv and Wiener, 2010; Kamath et al., 2020) allows models to abstain when uncertain, trading coverage for accuracy. Our mechanism is related but distinct: rather than abstaining from a prediction, the agent 

acts on uncertainty by seeking information. 

Hierarchical classification. Hierarchical text classification (Jr. and Freitas, 2011; Kowsari et al., 2017; Shimura et al., 2018; Banerjee et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020; Mao et al., 2019) assigns labels in taxonomy trees. These methods typically train end-to-end classifiers; we study an LLM agent nav-igating the taxonomy interactively, with the ability to seek help at any node. 

Multi-step reasoning. Chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2023), least-to-most (Zhou et al., 2023), de-composed prompting (Khot et al., 2023), PAL (Gao et al., 2023), scratchpads (Nye et al., 2021), STaR (Zelikman et al., 2022), reasoning via plan-ning (Hao et al., 2023), graph-of-thought (Besta 

Table 7: Ablation decomposing A CTION RATING on HTS classification (Claude Opus 4.6, N =1181 ). Rating only disables clarification gating ( τ =101 ). ∆: change vs. Baseline. Key finding : accuracy gains come entirely from self-gated clarification, which shifts information seeking from mandatory (agent blocked) to opportunis-tic (residual uncertainty resolved inline).                                                     

> Baseline Rating Only Full A CTION RATING
> HIERARCHICAL ACCURACY (%) 2-digit 79.3 78.8 (−0.5) 87.2 (+7.9)
> 4-digit 70.9 70.2 (−0.7) 82.0 (+11.1)
> 6-digit 61.8 61.2 (−0.6) 75.2 (+13.4)
> 8-digit 54.4 53.4 (−1.0) 69.5 (+15.1)
> 10-digit 50.8 50.0 (−0.9) 67.0 (+16.2)
> Avg Steps 5.6 5.7 5.4 CLARIFICATION BEHAVIOR (% RECORDS )Mandatory ↓35.2 33.6 (−1.6) 13.9 (−21.3)
> Opportunistic ↑0.0 0.0 (±0) 88.7 (+88.7)
> Any Clarify 35.2 33.6 (−1.6) 90.9 (+55.7)

et al., 2024), and cumulative reasoning (Dua et al., 2022) all improve multi-step reasoning. These fo-cus on improving the quality of reasoning itself; we focus on measuring where reasoning needs external help. 

I Ablation Details 

Table 7 presents the rating-only ablation (H3: 

τ =101 ). When the threshold is set above the max-imum possible score, no clarification is ever trig-gered; the agent rates actions but never acts on low confidence. This yields −0.9% relative to base-line, confirming that the mechanism’s value lies in actioning help-needed states, not in the rating computation itself. 

J Multi-Model Generalization 

Table 8 demonstrates that the regime shift general-izes across four LLM families (Claude, DeepSeek, GPT-OSS, and Qwen3). All models exhibit the mandatory-to-opportunistic mode shift and ISE im-provement under A CTION RATING , though abso-lute accuracy varies with model capability. The behavioral signature, not the accuracy level, is the transferable finding. Table 8: A CTION RATING generalization across LLM families on HTS classification ( N =1181 ). All models use 

τ =10 . Cell shading on Base and AR values follows the same accuracy scale as Table 1 ( high to low ). ∆:improvement over each model’s own baseline (pp).                                                                                

> 2-digit (%) 4-digit (%) 6-digit (%) 8-digit (%) 10-digit (%) Model Base AR ∆Base AR ∆Base AR ∆Base AR ∆Base AR ∆
> Claude Opus 4.6 79.3 87.2 +7.9 70.9 82.0 +11.1 61.8 75.2 +13.4 54.4 69.5 +15.1 50.8 67.0 +16.2
> DeepSeek V3 75.5 88.7 +13.1 65.2 82.8 +17.7 53.7 76.1 +22.4 45.9 71.3 +25.4 41.4 68.9 +27.5
> GPT-OSS 120B 72.9 79.3 +6.4 61.3 72.2 +10.9 49.9 64.1 +14.2 41.3 56.9 +15.6 36.9 53.6 +16.7
> Qwen3 235B 65.9 72.5 +6.6 54.7 63.3 +8.6 44.2 54.8 +10.7 36.6 49.9 +13.3 32.9 47.4 +14.5

K Cross-Benchmark Generalization 

Table 9 shows results on two additional HTS benchmarks (ATLAS and HSCodeComp) without dataset-specific tuning. The regime shift and accu-racy gains are preserved, providing evidence that the behavioral structure is not an artifact of the CBP-NY evaluation set. 

Scope of comparison. These comparisons are not intended as a controlled leaderboard claim: prior systems differ in model backbone, tool ac-cess, and answer source. We instead use them as a fixed-protocol transfer test , applying A CTION -RATING with τ locked at the CBP-NY-selected value of 10 and asking whether the behavioral sig-nature (mode shift and ISE improvement) survives on out-of-sample benchmarks without re-tuning. The signal we report is transfer of the signature, not a parity-controlled SOTA claim. 

Table 9: A CTION RATING on two independent HTS code benchmarks. Hierarchical accuracy (%) at 6- and 10-digit levels. ∆: A CTION RATING minus best prior method on the same dataset.                      

> Dataset Method 6-digit 10-digit
> ATLAS-test ATLAS 57.5 40.0 ACTION RATING 79.5 62.1
> ∆vs. prior +22.0 +22.1
> HSCodeComp SmolAgents (VLM) 62.4 46.8 SmolAgents (LLM) 59.8 42.7 Aworld (LLM) 59.2 41.3 ACTION RATING 76.6 69.3
> ∆vs. best prior +14.2 +22.5

L Threshold Sensitivity Details 

Table 10 presents the full threshold sweep. The behavioral phase diagram shows three regimes: (1) τ =1 (always ask): highest volume but ISE drops to 62%, indicating diminishing returns from indiscriminate help-seeking; (2) τ =10 (sweet spot): best ISE (74%) with strong accuracy and moderate volume (2.4 QA/record); (3) τ =101 (never ask): equivalent to rating-only, collapsing to baseline. The τ =50 →30 transition is the clearest inflection point where opportunistic help-seeking emerges. 

Why τ =10 , not τ =1 ? τ =1 reaches a numeri-cally higher 10-digit accuracy (72.5% vs. 67.0% at τ =10 ), so a reviewer may ask why τ =10 is reported as the operating point. The criterion is not final accuracy alone but the behavioral op-erating point that balances three quantities: ISE, QA volume, and accuracy. At τ =1 the agent is in a near-always-ask regime (roughly 6 QA per record); ISE drops to 62%, meaning a sizable frac-tion of clarification-triggered states do not yield better next-step navigation, and per-record inter-action cost balloons. At τ =10 , ISE peaks at 74% with 2.4 QA/record, so clarification fires more se-lectively and at states where it is locally useful. Because this paper’s contribution is help localiza-tion rather than maximal accuracy, the operating point that maximizes the localization-quality signal (ISE) at moderate cost is the one we treat as the analysis point; τ =1 is reported in Table 10 as the upper accuracy regime under nearly indiscriminate asking. 

Selection protocol and generalization validity. 

The threshold sweep was conducted exclusively on CBP-NY. τ =10 was selected as the operating point from the CBP-NY phase diagram and then locked :no additional tuning was performed for ATLAS or HSCodeComp. All ATLAS and HSCodeComp experiments (§5, Table 9) therefore use this fixed value, making them an out-of-sample generaliza-tion test rather than an extension of the tuning pro-cedure. The +18.8% accuracy gain on CBP-NY represents in-sample performance at the selected threshold; ATLAS and HSCodeComp provide the honest cross-dataset signal. Researchers deploying ACTION RATING in a new domain should treat the phase-diagram sweep as a one-time calibration step on in-domain development data before applying the fixed threshold to held-out evaluation. Table 10: Threshold sensitivity on HTS classification (Claude Opus 4.6, N =1181 ). Cell shading on accuracy follows the same scale as Table 1. For clarification: green = low mandatory / high opportunistic; red = high mandatory. τ =101 disables clarification gating (rating only). Bold : best value per accuracy column. 

Hierarchical Accuracy (%) Clarification Behavior (% records) Condition 2d 4d 6d 8d 10d Steps Mandatory ↓ Opportunistic ↑ Any 

Baseline 79.3 70.9 61.8 54.4 50.8 5.6 35.2 0.0 35.2 

τ =1 88.4 82.4 78.0 73.9 72.5 5.5 9.7 97.8 97.9 

τ =10 87.2 82.0 75.2 69.5 67.0 5.4 13.9 88.7 90.9 

τ =30 84.8 77.5 69.3 63.1 59.8 5.5 21.6 51.9 64.9 

τ =50 79.6 71.1 62.2 55.0 51.2 5.6 31.3 9.7 39.0 

τ =101 (off) 78.8 70.2 61.2 53.4 50.0 5.7 33.6 0.0 33.6 

M Trajectory Analysis 

Table 11 presents trajectory-level statistics includ-ing action composition, score gaps between top-ranked actions, and backtracking rates. Key ob-servations: (1) A CTION RATING does not increase navigation steps (5.4–5.7 across all τ settings), con-firming that help-seeking is additive rather than replacing navigation; (2) score gaps between the top-ranked action and clarification narrow at deeper tree levels, consistent with increasing uncertainty at finer classification granularity; (3) backtracking rates decrease under A CTION RATING , suggesting that proactive help-seeking reduces the need for corrective navigation. Table 12 breaks down opportunistic ISE by the agent’s traversal state at clarification time (on-path vs. off-path), complementing the aggregate ISE reported in §5.2. 

Table 11: Behavioural trajectory analysis: Baseline vs. ACTION RATING (Claude Opus 4.6, N =1181 ). N AVI -

> GATION

: action-use rates and episode length. I NFOR - 

> MATION

SEEKING : clarification mode breakdown. D E- 

> CISION

CONFIDENCE : A CTION RATING rating statistics (higher gap ⇒ more decisive selections). ∆: A CTION -RATING minus Baseline; green = improvement.                                          

> Metric Baseline ACTION RATING ∆
> NAVIGATION EFFICIENCY
> Traverse (% actions) 71.9 76.7 (+4.7)
> Backtrack (% records) 3.8 3.3 (-0.5)
> Jump (% records) 5.3 2.3 (-3.0)
> Avg Steps / Record 5.6 5.4 (-0.1)
> INFORMATION SEEKING
> Mandatory (% records) ↓35.2 13.9 (-21.3)
> Opportunistic (% records) ↑0.0 88.7 (+88.7)
> Avg Inline QA / Record 0.0 2.3 (+2.3)
> DECISION CONFIDENCE (A CTION RATING ONLY )Top-1 Rating Score –93.7 –Top-2 Rating Score –15.1 –Score Gap (1st −2nd) –78.5 –

Table 12: ISE for opportunistic (inline) clarification events, split by whether the agent’s traversal state was already on the correct HTS path at clarification time. 

On-path : the agent could have reached the correct leaf without further clarification; Off-path : the agent’s cur-rent node was not an ancestor of the true HTS code— clarification must steer the trajectory. Even when the agent is off-path, 67 % of opportunistic clarifications are followed by a correct traversal step, showing that the clarification sub-agent actively corrects misaligned trajectories. Wilson 95 % CIs.          

> Pre-QA agent state QA steps ISE 95 % CI
> On correct path 994 83.6 % [81.2, 85.8] Off correct path 1,703 67.3 % [65.0, 69.5]

N Extended Discussion 

This section expands on the discussion in §6. 

Cost–accuracy trade-off. ACTION RATING in-creases inference cost from 6.0 to 10.4 LLM calls per record (73% overhead), primarily from in-line clarification sub-agent calls and reentry re-selections. However, the cost increase is sublinear in accuracy gain: the first +10% costs ≈2 addi-tional calls, while the last +6% requires ≈2.4 ad-ditional calls. Self-Consistency at N =3 achieves +8.7% at 19 calls (3.2 × cost), placing it well below the A CTION RATING Pareto frontier. 

Error analysis. The 390 records that A CTION -RATING fails to classify correctly at 10-digit fall into three categories: (1) genuine ambiguity (42%): products whose correct classification requires do-main expertise beyond what any oracle can provide (e.g., tariff treatment of multi-material composites); (2) early commitment errors (31%): the agent com-mits to a wrong branch before the threshold trig-gers clarification; (3) answer specificity (27%): the product-owner simulation provides correct but in-sufficiently specific information for fine-grained distinctions at 8–10 digit levels. O Evaluation Dataset Construction: Product Extraction Prompt 

Product Extraction System Prompt 

Task: Extract product information from CBP customs ruling {raw_ruling_text} and format it as e-commerce product data. 

Ruling hierarchy: HQ rulings supersede NY rulings and are the final authoritative source. Ground truth HTS codes listed in the prompt are from HQ rulings where applicable. 

Difficulty: Easy : clear material, obvious heading; Medium : GRI 3(b) composite goods with clear precedent; Hard :unclear essential character, multiple possible headings. 

Critical: Extract only, do not invent. Use “Not specified” for missing fields. 

Fields to extract per product: item_name (50–100 chars) · product_description (1–2 sentences) · brand · color ·

material · size · manufacturer · gl_product_group_type · item_weight · listing_price · country_of_origin 

· hts_code · bullet_point (3–5 features, “|”-separated) · classification_reasoning (4–6 sentences, GRI rationale) 

· keywords · gri_applied 

Output format: 

{"overall_summary": "...", "difficulty": "easy|medium|hard", "products": [{"item_name": "...", "product_description": "...", "brand": "...", "color": "...", "material": "...", "size": "...", "manufacturer": "...", "gl_product_group_type": "...", "item_weight": "...", "listing_price": "...", "country_of_origin": "...", "hts_code": "...", "bullet_point": "F1|F2|F3", "classification_reasoning": "...", "keywords": "...", "gri_applied": "..."}]} 

Note: The full prompt includes the ruling text, metadata (ruling reference, date, type, ground truth HTS codes), and instructions for handling multiple products and composite goods. Extraction used AWS Bedrock batch inference, temperature = 0 .1, max_tokens = 8 ,000 .

P Prompt Templates 

P.1 Clarification Sub-Agent Prompt 

Clarification Sub-Agent System Prompt 

You are a product attributes expert. Your role is ONLY to answer factual questions about product characteristics. You have NO knowledge of, and must NEVER mention, tariff codes, duty rates, HTS codes, classification systems, chapters, headings, subheadings, or any trade/import terminology. You must REFUSE to answer questions about: General Note eligibility (e.g., General Note 15, qualifying insular possessions); tariff-rate quota provisions (e.g., additional U.S. notes to any chapter); trade preference programs (GSP, CBI, AGOA, FTA eligibility). If asked about any of the above, respond: “ This is a legal/trade determination, not a product attribute question. ”You have access to an INTERNAL PRODUCT FACTS DATABASE drawn from the {hts_code_description} field. This is a confidential internal reference containing confirmed product attribute facts. Treat every fact in it as authoritative first-party product knowledge. Never reveal the source name or hint that it originates from any classification system. 

Current Product: 

{product} 

Clarification Question: 

{question} 

Relevant Product Information (from internal product records): 

[INTERNAL PRODUCT FACTS: confidential; do NOT reference this source or any classification system in your answer] {hts_code_descriptions} 

CRITICAL INSTRUCTIONS for using the above Internal Product Facts: • These are confirmed, authoritative facts; treat them as ground truth. • Use them directly: “does NOT belong to: X” ⇒ product is NOT X; “More than 2 kg” ⇒ product HAS that attribute; “Confectionery” ⇒ product IS confectionery; “women’s” ⇒ product IS for women. • INFER attributes implied by the facts even if not in the product description. • NEVER mention “category 1/2/3/4/5”, “internal facts”, or any classification/trade terminology in your answer. 

Item Name: {item_name} 

Product Description: {product_description} 

Additional Product Notes: {reasoning_traces} Product Attributes: Material: {material} | Color: {color} | Brand: {brand} | Size: {size} |Manufacturer: {manufacturer} | Origin: {country_of_origin} | Weight: {item_weight} 

ANSWER GUIDELINES: 

1. Answer definitively; say YES or NO when possible. 2. Use the Internal Product Facts WITHOUT hedging; do NOT say “not specified” if the facts already imply the answer. 3. State ONLY factual product attributes: materials, size, form, composition, end-use. 4. Do NOT mention codes, category numbers, or any trade/tariff references. 5. Do NOT begin with preambles such as “Based on the classification. . . ”; state the fact directly. 6. Keep the answer to 1–2 sentences. 

Examples: 

Q: “Is the container size over 2 kg?” 

✓ “Yes, the product is packaged in containers exceeding 2 kg.” 

× “The product description does not specify the container size.” 

Q: “Does this contain dairy products?” 

✓ “No, this product does not contain dairy products or milk solids.” 

× “Based on the classification hierarchy. . . ” 

Q: “Is this retail candy or confectionery?” 

✓ “Yes, this is confectionery for retail consumption.” 

× “The description does not explicitly state this.” 

Answer (factual product attributes only, NO classification preamble, NO hedging): 

Implementation notes and oracle design rationale. The 

{hts_node_descriptions_for_current_item} field is populated from the HTS knowledge graph node descriptions along the item’s ground-truth classification path. All numeric HTS codes are replaced by generic category labels (“category 1” through “category 5”) via a regex filter before injection, and a second pass is applied to the generated answer to mask any residual HTS code references. These filters remove explicit identifiers but do not eliminate semantic information derived from the correct path. 

Knowledge-source characterization. The oracle draws on HTS node descriptions along the ground-truth path to produce product-attribute answers. As confirmed by the knowledge-channel audit (§5.4, Appendix D), the channel primarily conveys product-owner knowledge rather than classification paths, so results measure help-seeking and gating behavior in isolation from answer quality. The results should be interpreted as measuring where the agent chooses to seek help and how that help-seeking affects navigation accuracy. Replacing this controlled oracle with deployment-realistic information sources (product databases, manufacturer specifications) is an important direction for future work. 

P.2 Navigation Prompt (Baseline) 

Navigation Agent System Prompt 

You are an expert HTS classification agent navigating the Harmonized Tariff Schedule tree structure. 

[{clarifications_section}] (injected when prior Q&A exists; includes per-node duplicate guard and hard cap at 2 clarifications per node) 

GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION (GRI) GRI 1: Classification is determined by heading terms and relative section/chapter notes. GRI 2: Incomplete articles and mixtures follow the essential character of the complete article or primary constituent. GRI 3: When classifiable under two or more headings: (a) most specific prevails; (b) essential character for mixtures/sets; (c) last heading in numerical order. GRI 4: Classify under the heading for the most akin goods. GRI 5: Special rules for containers and packing materials. GRI 6: Subheading classification applies GRI 1–5 mutatis mutandis. Additional U.S. Rules: 

Classification by principal use at importation; “parts” provisions cover goods solely/principally used as parts. 

NAVIGATION CONTEXT 

Parent Node: {parent_code}: {parent_desc} 

Current Node: {current_code}: {current_desc} 

Product: {product_description} 

Path History: {history} 

AVAILABLE DIRECT CHILDREN: 

- {code}: {description} (one per line; pruned nodes listed separately with warning) 

AVAILABLE ACTIONS: 

1. traverse_child(code) : descend to a child node 2. backtrack : return to parent 3. need_clarify(question) : ask a product-attribute question (not HTS/trade references) 4. jump(code) : cross-tree navigation via exclusion edges 5. confirm : declare final classification (only at 10-digit terminal leaf node) 

Respond with JSON: 

{"action_type": "traverse_child", "target": "code", "question": null, "reasoning": "why this child"} {"action_type": "need_clarify", "target": null, "question": "specific product attribute question", "reasoning": "which children this resolves"} {"action_type": "confirm", "target": null, "question": null, "reasoning": "why confirming at this 10-digit leaf"} 

P.3 Action Rating Section (appended when A CTION RATING enabled) 

Action Rating Section (appended to Navigation Prompt) 

ACTION RATING (required, include in every response) From ALL available actions listed above (traverse_child options, backtrack, need_clarify, jump, confirm), identify your TOP K most relevant actions and rate each 0–100: 100 = definitely the right move at this node 0 = completely wrong / would derail classification 50 = uncertain / could go either way 

Format each action description as: 

traverse_child to {code} ({desc}) backtrack to {parent_code} ({parent_desc}) need_clarify about {topic} confirm code {code} · jump to {code} ({desc}) 

Example (do not copy these scores): 

traverse_child to 8418 (Refrigerators): 92/100 because: product is clearly a refrigerating appliance need_clarify about cooling capacity: 45/100 because: capacity determines the correct 8-digit code backtrack to 84 (Machinery): 3/100 because: current node is already specific enough 

Include ratings in JSON as "action_ratings" (ranked highest → lowest): 

"action_ratings": [ {"action_description": "traverse_child to 8418 ...", "score": 92, "reason": "product is a refrigerating appliance"}, ... (exactly K entries) ]