Title: GBC: Gradient-Based Connections for Optimizing Multi-Agent Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.28187v1

Published Time: Mon, 29 Jun 2026 01:08:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# GBC: Gradient-Based Connections for Optimizing Multi-Agent Systems 

Xiaocheng Yang, Abdulrahman Alrabah, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gokhan Tur 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 

{xy61, alrabah2, dilek, gokhan}@illinois.edu 

Abstract 

Multi-agent systems (MAS) built on large lan-guage models (LLMs) provide a promising framework for solving complex tasks through role specialization and structured interaction. However, their performance is often limited by miscoordination and, more fundamentally, the lack of fine-grained credit assignment across agents. Existing approaches typically rely on coarse-grained feedback, making it difficult to identify which agents or interaction steps are responsible for errors. We propose Gradient-Based Connections (GBC), an approach for fine-grained attribution and optimization of multi-agent systems. GBC models a MAS as a computational graph and introduces gradient-based connection weights to quantify the in-fluence of each agent’s output on downstream agents at the token level. By constructing an attribution graph and propagating task-specific loss signals backward, our method enables precise identification of error sources and tar-geted prompt optimization. We further de-velop AgentChord, an efficient implementation that leverages prefix-based gradient computa-tion. Experiments on MultiWOZ and τ -bench show that GBC improves multi-agent perfor-mance and outperforms strong single-agent and multi-agent baselines, and higher attribution quality is associated with greater optimization effectiveness. Code is available at: https: //github.com/yxc-cyber/AgentChord .

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have enabled a new paradigm of multi-agent systems (MAS), where multiple specialized agents collaborate through structured interactions to solve complex tasks. By decomposing problems into sub-tasks and assigning them to different agents, multi-agent systems have demonstrated promise across a wide range of domains, including task-oriented dialogue, software engineering, and open-ended simulations (Gupta et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2024). However, despite their conceptual appeal, recent studies show that multi-agent systems often fail to consistently outperform strong single-agent baselines and suffer from issues such as miscoor-dination, inefficient communication, and lack of robust verification (Pan et al., 2025). A fundamental challenge underlying these limi-tations is the lack of fine-grained credit assignment. In multi-agent workflows, errors in the final out-put often originate from specific agents or interac-tion steps, yet existing methods typically rely on coarse-grained signals (e.g., overall task success or reward) to guide optimization (Khattab et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2025; Yuksekgonul et al., 2024; Zhuge et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2025). This makes it diffi-cult to identify which components of the system are responsible for failures, limiting the effectiveness of both manual debugging and automatic optimiza-tion. Recent advances in prompt optimization and LLM-based system design have explored gradient-inspired methods for improving performance, such as textual feedback propagation and self-supervised optimization (Yang et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2023; Pryzant et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2025). While these approaches introduce more structured opti-mization signals, they are primarily designed for single-agent or monolithic pipelines, and do not explicitly address the challenges of attribution and optimization in multi-agent settings. In parallel, prior work on multi-agent systems has focused on improving coordination through architectural de-sign—such as role specialization, graph-based com-munication, and task decomposition—but largely lacks principled mechanisms for token-level or interaction-level attribution across agents. To address these challenges, we propose Gradient-Based Connections (GBC), a novel ap-proach for optimizing multi-agent systems through fine-grained attribution. We model a multi-agent system as a directed computational graph and in-

> arXiv:2606.28187v1 [cs.MA] 26 Jun 2026

troduce a gradient-based connection mechanism that quantifies the influence of each agent’s out-put on subsequent agents at the token level. By constructing an attribution graph over agent inter-actions and propagating task-specific verbal loss signals backward through this graph, GBC enables precise identification of the components most re-sponsible for errors. This facilitates more effective and targeted optimization of agent prompts. Building on this formulation, we develop AgentChord, a practical framework that integrates GBC with a language-model-based optimizer to iteratively refine multi-agent systems. To ensure scalability, we introduce an efficient implementa-tion that leverages a prefix-based gradient compu-tation strategy to reduce memory overhead during backpropagation. We evaluate our approach on both task-oriented dialogue (MultiWOZ (Ye et al., 2022)) and inter-active tool-use environments ( τ -bench (Yao et al., 2025)), demonstrating that GBC significantly im-proves multi-agent performance across multiple metrics. Our results show that fine-grained attri-bution enables effective optimization, and in some cases allows multi-agent systems to surpass strong single-agent baselines. Analysis of the MultiWOZ results further reveals an association between attri-bution quality and optimization effectiveness. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose Gradient-Based Connections (GBC), a method for token-level attribution across agents via gradient-based signals. • We introduce AgentChord, a scalable frame-work for optimizing multi-agent systems us-ing attribution-guided updates. • We demonstrate the effectiveness of our ap-proach on multiple benchmarks, including MultiWOZ and τ -bench, showing improve-ments over single-agent and multi-agent base-lines. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Prompt Optimization 

The performance of large language models (LLMs) is highly sensitive to prompt design, motivating extensive work on automatic prompt optimiza-tion. Early approaches formulate prompt design as black-box search over natural language instruc-tions, where candidate prompts are generated and evaluated iteratively using LLMs themselves (Zhou et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024). These methods leverage LLMs as both generators and evaluators but rely on exploration guided by coarse-grained performance signals. A complementary line of work introduces gradient-inspired optimization for prompts. Pro-TeGi models prompt refinement as following "tex-tual gradients", where natural language feedback describing model errors is used to iteratively up-date prompts (Pryzant et al., 2023). More gener-ally, TextGrad extends this idea by treating LLM-based systems as computation graphs and prop-agating feedback signals across components, en-abling automatic differentiation over prompt vari-ables (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024). Recent work further explores self-supervised optimization. Self-Supervised Prompt Optimization (SPO) eliminates the need for labeled data by deriving optimization signals from pairwise comparisons of model out-puts (Xiang et al., 2025). In addition, evolutionary approaches such as GAAPO and GEPA apply genetic algorithms to explore diverse prompt candidates through muta-tion and selection (Sécheresse et al., 2025; Agrawal et al., 2026). Despite these advances, these methods primarily focus on optimizing prompts for single-agent or single-step generation settings and rely on global performance feedback. They lack mechanisms for fine-grained attribution of errors to specific tokens, intermediate reasoning steps, or interacting com-ponents, limiting their effectiveness in complex multi-agent systems. 

2.2 Multi-Agent System 

Multi-agent systems (MAS) built on large lan-guage models (LLMs) have emerged as a powerful paradigm for solving complex tasks via role spe-cialization, task decomposition, and iterative inter-agent communication. General-purpose frame-works such as AutoGen and ChatDev demonstrate that flexible multi-agent conversations and struc-tured role-based collaboration can effectively co-ordinate LLM agents for complex workflows (Wu et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2024). MAS have since been applied across diverse domains, including re-search simulation, open-ended social environments, and task-oriented dialogues (Yu et al., 2025; Ye and Jaques, 2024; Gupta et al., 2024). To improve scalability and coordination, recent work introduces structured architectures for orga-nizing agent interactions. Graph-based formula-tions represent agents and their communications as computational graphs, enabling systematic reason-ing and optimization of information flow (Zhuge et al., 2024). Similarly, DAG-based collaboration networks and task dependency graphs structure agent interactions for scalable coordination and complex task execution (Qian et al., 2025; Dong et al., 2024). Complementary approaches improve efficiency via role-aware routing and dynamic con-text selection (Liu et al., 2025). Despite these advances, recent studies show that MAS often provide limited gains over strong single-agent baselines and suffer from inter-agent mis-alignment, inefficient coordination, and weak ver-ification (Pan et al., 2025). Moreover, identifying the source of errors remains challenging, as fail-ures arise from specific agents or interaction steps but are difficult to attribute automatically (Zhang et al., 2025a). These limitations are further com-pounded by broader risks such as miscoordination and emergent behaviors in complex multi-agent settings (Hammond et al., 2025). 

2.3 Multi-Agent System Optimization 

Beyond static architectures, a growing line of work treats multi-agent systems as optimizable pro-grams. DSPy compiles declarative LLM pipelines into optimized execution graphs (Khattab et al., 2024), while TextGrad and metaTextGrad intro-duce gradient-like optimization mechanisms that propagate natural language feedback through com-putation graphs (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2025). In the multi-agent setting, GPTSwarm op-timizes both agent behaviors and inter-agent con-nectivity within graph-structured systems, while MetaAgent automates the construction of agent organizations (Zhuge et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025b). Reinforcement learning approaches fur-ther enable system-level optimization by learning from interaction trajectories and addressing credit assignment across agents (Luo et al., 2025). Overall, existing approaches either rely on man-ually designed coordination mechanisms or opti-mize systems using coarse-grained signals, with-out providing fine-grained attribution across agents and interaction steps. In contrast, our work intro-duces a gradient-based connection framework that enables token-level attribution across agents, allow-ing more precise credit assignment and principled optimization of multi-agent systems. 

3 Method 

We propose a framework for optimizing multi-agent systems with four components: agent graph, gradient-based connection, loss, and optimizer. Fig-ure 1 illustrates the overall pipeline. Given an input, the agent graph produces a final output through se-quential agent interactions. Gradient-based connec-tions construct an attribution graph that quantifies the influence of each predecessor output. A task-specific verbal loss is attached to the final output, and gradients are propagated backward to extract at-tribution trajectories identifying error sources. The optimizer then updates agent prompts based on these trajectories. 

3.1 Agent Graph 

We model the forward procedure of a multi-agent system as a directed acyclic graph G = ( V, E ),following Zhuge et al. (2024). Each agent v ∈ V is defined by a prompt–model pair (Pv, M v). Edges 

E = {(v1, v 2) | Ov1 ⊆ Iv2 } represent information flow. The output of agent v is: 

Ov = Mv(Pv + Iv). (1) The input is: 

Iv =

(Iinitial , if v is the first node ,

P 

> u∈pre( v)

Ou, otherwise .

(2) Agents are executed in topological order, and the final output is produced by the last agent. 

3.2 Gradient-Based Connection 

We introduce gradient-based connections to quan-tify the contribution of each predecessor output. For each Ov, we compute connection weights 

WOv (Ou) for u ∈ pre( v) using gradient-based signals. We consider four variants: mean/max of L1 norm and mean/max of gradient–input product (Sections 3.2.1–3.2.4). For each output, we retain the top-m prede-cessors to construct an attribution graph Gattr =(Vattr , E attr ):

Eattr = {(vattr ,1, v attr ,2) | (vattr ,1, v attr ,2) ∈ V 2

> attr

,WOv2 (Ov1 ) ∈ Top m(WOv2 )}.

(3) We use m = 1 by default. LLM Output               

> Input LLM Output
> LLM Output
> Tool Output
> LLM Output LLM Output Loss
> LLM Output
> Input LLM Output
> LLM Output
> Tool Output
> LLM Output LLM Output Loss
> 0.2
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 0.2
> 0.5
> 0.3
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> Forward
> Attribution
> LLM Output
> Input LLM Output
> LLM Output
> Tool Output
> LLM Output LLM Output Loss
> 0.2
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 0.2
> 0.5
> 0.3
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> 1.0
> Backward
> Input LLM Output LLM Output LLM Output Loss
> Update
> Optimizer Target Rewrite prompt

Figure 1: Overview of multi-agent system optimization with GBC. The procedure consists of four steps: (1) Forward , (2) Attribution , (3) Backward , and (4) Update . (1) Forward : The agent graph processes the input sequentially and produces the final output. (2) Attribution : Gradient-based connections construct an attribution graph that quantifies the influence of each predecessor output. (3) Backward : The framework propagates the loss backward through the attribution graph to extract attribution trajectories that identify the outputs most responsible for the final result. (4) Update : The optimizer updates agent prompts based on these trajectories to improve overall performance. 

3.2.1 Mean of L1 Norm 

WOv (Ou) = avg 



∇ Y

> w∈Ov

P(w | Embed( Ou)) L1



.

(4) 

This computes token-level salience scores via gradients and aggregates them by averaging. 

3.2.2 Max of L1 Norm 

WOv (Ou) = max 



∇ Y

> w∈Ov

P(w | Embed( Ou)) L1



.

(5) 

This emphasizes the most influential tokens, re-ducing noise from irrelevant ones. 

3.2.3 Mean of Product with Input 

WOv (Ou) = avg 



∇ Y

> w∈Ov

P(w | Embed( Ou)) 

· Embed( Ou)



.

(6) 

This captures first-order contributions via gradi-ent–input interactions (Shrikumar et al., 2017). 

3.2.4 Max of Product with Input 

WOv (Ou) = max 



∇ Y

> w∈Ov

P(w | Embed( Ou)) 

· Embed( Ou)



.

(7) 

This combines the gradient–input interactions with the emphasis on most influential tokens. 

3.3 Loss 

We define a task-specific verbal loss based on the system output and attach it to the attribution graph. The loss encodes correctness and quality signals, and can include fine-grained feedback (e.g., ground truth comparisons or explanations) to guide opti-mization. Details are provided in Appendix B. 

3.4 Optimizer 

We backpropagate the loss through the attribution graph to obtain attribution trajectories: 

τ = [( s0, c 0), . . . , (ℓ, L ℓ)] .

Each trajectory traces the contribution from in-puts or intermediate outputs to the loss. The set 

T (input ) collects all such trajectories. The proce-dure is summarized in Algorithm 1. We then use a language model as the optimizer (Yang et al., 2024). Given current prompts, at-tribution trajectories, and optimization history, it updates agent prompts to improve performance. Details are provided in Appendix C. 

4 AgentChord 

Following the pipeline in Section 3, we develop 

AgentChord 1, a practical framework for multi-agent prompt optimization using Gradient-Based Connections (GBC). To enable scalability, we introduce a prefix-based gradient computation technique to reduce memory overhead. As defined in Equation 1, each agent processes a prompt and an input. Since attri-bution is computed only with respect to the input, gradients are required only for input tokens, while prompt tokens are treated as a fixed prefix. 

> 1

Code is available at: https://github.com/yxc-cyber/ AgentChord .Algorithm 1 Backpropagation of Attribution Tra-jectories 

Require: Attribution graph Gattr = ( Vattr , E attr )

Require: Loss node set Vloss = {(ℓ, L ℓ)}

Require: Initial input Iinitial 

1: Initialize an empty list T (s) for each subject s ∈ V ∪{Iinitial }

2: for all (ℓ, L ℓ) ∈ Vloss do 

3: cache ← [[( ℓ, L ℓ)]] 

4: for all (v, O v ) ∈ pre attr (ℓ, L ℓ) do 

5: BACKWARD ((v, O v ), cache )6: end for 

7: end for 

8: return {T (s)}s∈V ∪{ Iinitial }

9: function BACKWARD ((v, O v ), cache )10: new _cache ← [ ] 

11: for all τ ∈ cache do 

12: τ ′ ← copy( τ )

13: Insert (v, O v ) at the beginning of τ ′

14: Append τ ′ to new _cache 

15: end for 

16: T (v) ← T (v) ∪ new _cache 

17: if pre attr (v, O v ) = ∅ then 

18: input _cache ← [ ] 

19: for all τ ∈ new _cache do 

20: τ ′ ← copy( τ )

21: Insert (input, I initial ) at the beginning of τ ′

22: Append τ ′ to input _cache 

23: end for 

24: T (input ) ← T (input ) ∪ input _cache 

25: else 

26: for all (u, O u) ∈ pre attr (v, O v ) do 

27: BACKWARD ((u, O u), new _cache )28: end for 

29: end if 

30: end function 

In practice, we first pass the prompt through the model without gradients to obtain the KV cache, and then process the input with gradients enabled. This avoids storing gradients for prompt tokens. As a result, memory complexity is reduced from 

O(n · d · L)

to 

O(( n − k) · d · L),

where n is the total sequence length, k is the prompt length, d is the hidden dimension, and L is the number of layers. 

5 Experiment 

Multi-agent systems enable task decomposition and specialization, which can improve performance in complex, multi-domain settings. We evaluate GBC on two benchmarks: MultiWOZ for task-oriented dialogue and τ -bench for interactive tool-use. 

5.1 MultiWOZ Setup MultiWOZ (Ye et al., 2022; Budzianowski et al., 2018; Eric et al., 2020; Zang et al., 2020; Han Manager 

> Input
> [User] xxx [Agent] xxx [User] xxx
> Responder
> JGA Loss
> Hotel Worker
> Attraction Worker
> Train Worker
> Restaurant Worker
> Taxi Worker
> Output
> (2nd Turn)
> Input
> [User] xxx
> Output
> (1st Turn)
> Input
> (Last Turn)
> Output
> (Last Turn)
> Inform &Success Loss

Figure 2: Multi-agent system tailored to MultiWOZ. 

Model Inform Success JGA Recall Precision Slot F1 Single-Agent 

Llama-3.3-70B-It 84.0 71.0 40.3 96.9 81.5 88.5 Qwen-3-32B 88.0 40.0 44.4 97.7 80.9 88.5 

Multi-Agent (Before Optimization) 

Llama-3.3-70B-It 87.0 57.0 24.3 97.4 54.1 69.5 Qwen-3-32B 95.0 80.0 28.9 92.5 69.4 79.3 

Multi-Agent (Optimized with Mean of L1 Norm) 

Llama-3.3-70B-It 42.0 07.0 28.6 90.7 78.0 83.9 Qwen-3-32B 99.0 94.0 54.4 98.1 85.5 91.4 Multi-Agent (Optimized with Max of L1 Norm) 

Llama-3.3-70B-It 87.0 54.0 36.7 94.5 78.9 86.0 Qwen-3-32B 99.0 95.0 53.0 98.3 85.2 91.3 Multi-Agent (Optimized with Mean of Product with Input) 

Llama-3.3-70B-It 82.0 59.0 39.0 96.7 79.6 87.4 Qwen-3-32B 98.0 83.0 51.9 96.9 84.6 90.3 

Multi-Agent (Optimized with Max of Product with Input) 

Llama-3.3-70B-It 85.0 62.0 38.9 94.7 81.7 87.7 Qwen-3-32B 95.0 86.0 51.0 97.4 79.3 87.4 

Table 1: Single-agent System and multi-agent system performance on MultiWOZ 2.4. The table shows the inform score, success score, joint goal accuracy (JGA), slot recall, slot precision, and slot F1 score. Best results 

are bold and underlined; second-best are bold. 

et al., 2021) is a task-oriented dialogue benchmark with annotated dialogue states. We use MultiWOZ 2.4 and sample 100 dialogues from five domains (Attraction, Hotel, Restaurant, Train, Taxi). We adopt a manager–worker architecture (Fig-ure 2). The manager assigns tasks based on dia-logue context, domain-specific workers perform API calls, and a responder generates the final re-sponse. 

Verbal Loss We use two types of verbal loss: (1) a turn-level JGA loss that compares predicted and ground-truth dialogue states, including false posi-tive and false negative slot-value pairs; and (2) a dialogue-level Inform & Success loss that evaluates whether the system retrieves correct entities and provides requested information. Detailed prompts are provided in Appendix B.1. Figure 3: Optimization dynamics of Qwen-3-32B on MultiWOZ. Step 0 denotes the unoptimized multi-agent baseline. Inform and Slot Recall remain high throughout optimization, while JGA , Slot Precision , and Slot F1   

> show clear upward trends, indicating improved dialogue-state tracking and fewer over-predicted slots. Success is more variable, suggesting that full goal completion remains harder to optimize. Overall, L1-norm-based connection weights achieve the strongest final performance.

Metrics We report Inform, Success (conversation-level), and Joint Goal Accu-racy (JGA), Slot Recall, Slot Precision, and Slot F1 (turn/slot-level). 

Optimization Setup We use 30 training samples, updating prompts every 3 samples (10 steps total). Backbone models are Llama-3.3-70B-It and Qwen-3-32B. 

Results Results are shown in Table 1. Before optimization, the multi-agent systems do not con-sistently outperform their single-agent counterparts. For example, although the Qwen-3-32B multi-agent system achieves higher Inform and Success scores than the single-agent baseline, its JGA and Slot F1 are substantially lower. After optimization with GBC, performance improves across most met-rics, especially for Qwen-3-32B. With mean of L1 norm, Qwen-3-32B reaches the best overall Mul-tiWOZ performance, improving JGA from 28.9 to 54.4 and Slot F1 from 79.3 to 91.4, while also achieving 99.0 Inform and 94.0 Success. The max of L1 norm variant obtains similarly strong results, with 99.0 Inform, 95.0 Success, 53.0 JGA, and 91.3 Slot F1. These optimized multi-agent systems sub-stantially outperform the Qwen-3-32B single-agent baseline on Inform, Success, JGA, and Slot F1, demonstrating that GBC can convert an initially under-optimized multi-agent system into a stronger task-oriented dialogue agent. Figure 3 further illustrates the optimization dy-namics for Qwen-3-32B. Across the four connec-tion weight formulations, most metrics, includ-ing Inform, JGA, Slot Recall, Slot Precision, and Slot F1, show clear upward trends over optimiza-tion steps. In particular, JGA and Slot F1 im-prove steadily from the early steps, indicating that attribution-guided prompt updates help the system better track dialogue states and predict slot val-ues. Success remains more variable and challeng-ing, suggesting that completing the full user goal still depends on difficult long-horizon coordina-tion. Overall, the trends in Figure 3 are consistent with Table 1 and show that GBC provides stable improvements during optimization, with the L1-norm-based variants yielding the strongest final performance.  

> Figure 4: The occurrences of different error types detected by the optimizer under different connection weight formulae on MultiWOZ with Qwen-3-32B.

Error Analysis We categorize errors into seven types: cross-domain errors, tool misuse, informa-tion omission, over-prediction, unclear manager instructions, booking errors, and response quality issues. As shown in Figure 4, cross-domain errors, infor-mation omission, and over-prediction occur most frequently. This suggests that MultiWOZ failures are mainly caused by multi-domain coordination and dialogue-state tracking, rather than only by surface-level response generation. Cross-domain errors indicate that the manager-worker routing is still imperfect, especially when multiple domain-specific agents are available. Information omis-sion shows that even when relevant information appears in the dialogue, it may be lost during extraction or inter-agent communication. Over-prediction further suggests that agents sometimes infer slot values beyond the evidence provided by the user. These patterns are consistent with the improvements in JGA, Slot Precision, and Slot F1 after optimization, since reducing omitted and over-predicted slots directly improves dialogue-state tracking. Overall, the error distribution indicates that GBC improves the system by targeting coor-dination and state-tracking failures, while cross-domain responsibility assignment remains a key challenge. 

Update Analysis Figure 5 shows normalized up-date frequency (NUF): 

NUF( v) = |{ i | v ∈ Ui}| |{ i | v ∈ Ri}| . (8)  

> Figure 5: Heatmap of normalized agent update fre-quency by connection strategy with Qwen-3-32B.

Ui is the set of updated agents for the i-th round and 

Ri is the set of relevant agents for the i-th round. Responder and manager agents are always relevant, while domain-specific workers are relevant if and only if the task domain matches the work’s domain. Domain-specific workers are updated more fre-quently than manager or responder agents, consis-tent with the observed error patterns. 

> Figure 6: Attribution accuracy grouped by model within each connection weight setting.

Attribution Quality Analysis We approximate the accuracy of attribution by checking whether each attribution trajectory contains the worker agents responsible for the domains of the dialogue. Figure 6 shows the attribution accuracy for the 2 models and 4 connection weights. Regardless of the model, mean and max L1 norm always lead to the best two attribution accuracies, which explains why those two connection weight formulae per-form best in terms of the metrics of the MultiWOZ task. This reveals that higher attribution quality is associated with greater optimization effectiveness. 

5.2 τ -bench Setup τ -bench (Yao et al., 2025) evaluates agents in multi-step tool-use environments. We focus on the retail domain due to the availability of training data. Manager 

> Input
> [User] xxx [Agent] xxx [User] xxx
> Responder
> Output
> (2nd Turn)
> Input
> [User] xxx
> Output
> (1st Turn)
> Input
> (Last Turn)
> Output
> (Last Turn)
> Reward Loss
> Post Delivery Worker
> User Profile Worker
> Order Modification Worker
> User Resolution Worker
> Retrieval Worker
> User Simulator

Figure 7: Multi-agent system tailored to τ -bench. 

The system follows a manager–worker design (Figure 7). Workers handle user resolution, re-trieval, order modification, post-delivery, and user profile tasks, while a responder generates outputs. A user simulator interacts with the system itera-tively. 

Verbal Loss We define a reward-based verbal loss at the conversation level, which includes the ground-truth tool-call trajectory, the agent-generated trajectory, and required response con-tents. The loss evaluates both tool-call correctness and whether system outputs contain all required information. Details are provided in Appendix B.2. 

Metrics We evaluate performance using three conversation-level metrics. Action reward mea-sures whether the sequence of tool calls matches the ground-truth trajectory. Output reward mea-sures whether system responses contain all required information. Overall reward is defined as the prod-uct of the two, requiring both correct actions and complete responses. 

Optimization Setup We use 10 training tasks and update prompts after each conversation. GPT-4o-mini is used as the user simulator due to budget constraints. 

Results Results are shown in Table 2. Opti-mization consistently improves multi-agent perfor-mance over its pre-optimization baseline. Among the optimized variants, max of L1 norm yields the strongest overall performance for Qwen-3-32B, im-proving overall reward from 13.0 to 24.3, surpass-ing the strong single-agent baseline of 22.6. Mean of product with input also reaches an overall re-ward of 24.3 for Qwen-3-32B, mainly driven by a large improvement in action reward from 13.9 to 27.0. For Llama-3.3-70B-It, all optimized multi-agent variants improve over the pre-optimization baseline, with max of product with input achiev-ing the best overall reward, increasing from 6.1 to                                        

> Model Action Reward Output Reward Overall Reward Single-Agent
> Llama-3.3-70B-It 09.6 62.6 07.0 Qwen-3-32B 27.8 71.3 22.6
> Multi-Agent (Before Optimization)
> Llama-3.3-70B-It 09.6 70.4 06.1 Qwen-3-32B 13.9 78.3 13.0
> Multi-Agent (Optimized with Mean of L1 Norm)
> Llama-3.3-70B-It 11.3 70.4 08.7 Qwen-3-32B 17.4 73.0 13.9
> Multi-Agent (Optimized with Max of L1 Norm)
> Llama-3.3-70B-It 13.9 73.0 09.6 Qwen-3-32B 28.7 79.1 24.3 Multi-Agent (Optimized with Mean of Product with Input)
> Llama-3.3-70B-It 12.2 72.2 08.7 Qwen-3-32B 27.0 78.3 24.3 Multi-Agent (Optimized with Max of Product with Input)
> Llama-3.3-70B-It 13.9 71.3 09.6 Qwen-3-32B 20.0 77.4 17.4

Table 2: Single-agent system and multi-agent system performance on τ -bench. The table shows the action rewards, output rewards, and overall rewards for the retail domain. Best results are bold and underlined; 

second-best are bold. 

9.6. These results demonstrate the overall effective-ness of GBC for optimizing multi-agent systems, as it consistently improves overall reward across both backbone models and enables the Qwen-3-32B multi-agent system to outperform its strong single-agent counterpart. 

Figure 8: The occurrences of different error types detected by the optimizer under different connection weight formulae on τ -bench with Qwen-3-32B. 

Error Analysis We identify five error types: tool misuse, retrieval/identification failure, unclear man-ager instructions, premature escalation, and incor-rect explanations. As shown in Figure 8, retrieval and identification failures dominate across connection-weight set-tings. This reflects a central difficulty of τ -bench: successful task completion depends not only on selecting the right tool, but also on resolving the correct user, order, and task state across multiple turns. When this grounding step fails, later tool calls and final responses are likely to become in-correct even if the overall workflow is reasonable. Tool misuse also contributes to failures, indicating that action selection remains important. Premature escalation or stalling shows that agents sometimes fail to persist through the required tool-use proce-dure, while incorrect success or explanation affects whether the final response communicates the cor-rect outcome. Overall, these errors highlight the long-horizon nature of τ -bench, where reliable re-trieval, entity tracking, and inter-agent information transfer are necessary for both high action reward and high output reward. 

6 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduce Gradient-Based Connec-tions (GBC), a novel framework for fine-grained attribution and optimization in multi-agent sys-tems. By modeling a multi-agent workflow as a computational graph and leveraging gradient-based signals at the token level, GBC enables precise identification of how intermediate agent outputs influence downstream decisions. This formula-tion addresses a fundamental limitation of prior approaches—namely, the lack of effective credit as-signment across agents—and provides a principled mechanism for diagnosing and improving multi-agent coordination. Building on GBC, we develop AgentChord, an efficient optimization framework that integrates attribution-guided feedback with iterative prompt refinement. Through a prefix-based gradient com-putation strategy, AgentChord makes gradient-based attribution feasible for large-scale language models. Empirical results on MultiWOZ and τ -bench demonstrate that GBC consistently improves multi-agent performance across a range of metrics, and in many cases enables multi-agent systems to match or surpass strong single-agent baselines. Analysis of the MultiWOZ results further reveals that higher attribution quality is associated with greater optimization effectiveness. Furthermore, our analysis provides meaningful insights into error patterns, revealing both system-level weaknesses and task-intrinsic challenges. Overall, our work highlights the importance of token-level, cross-agent credit assignment as a key component for advancing multi-agent systems. We believe GBC offers a general and extensible ap-proach for future research on interpretable and op-timizable multi-agent architectures. 

Limitations 

Despite its effectiveness, our approach has several limitations that warrant further investigation. First, computational cost remains a concern. Although the prefix-based optimization reduces memory overhead, gradient-based attribution still requires multiple forward and backward passes through LLMs, making the approach expensive compared to purely black-box methods. This con-straint limits scalability to larger systems or longer interaction horizons. Second, GBC relies on the quality and design of the verbal loss function. Since the loss is task-specific and expressed in natural language, its ef-fectiveness depends on how well it captures fine-grained errors. Poorly designed loss signals may lead to noisy or misleading attribution, reducing optimization effectiveness. Third, while GBC provides token-level attribu-tion, it still operates under a first-order approxima-tion of influence (e.g., gradient-based signals). This may not fully capture complex nonlinear interac-tions between agents, especially in long multi-turn or highly entangled workflows. Fourth, our experiments focus on specific bench-marks (MultiWOZ and τ -bench) and particular sys-tem architectures (e.g., manager–worker setups). Although results are promising, the generalization of GBC to other domains—such as open-ended rea-soning, code generation, or large-scale autonomous agent systems—remains to be validated. Finally, our analysis reveals that some error types—such as cross-domain errors, information omission, and retrieval failures—persist even after optimization, suggesting that these may stem from intrinsic task difficulty or limitations of current LLMs, rather than attribution alone. Future work may explore more efficient gradient approximations, improved verbal loss design, inte-gration with reinforcement learning, and extensions to dynamic or adaptive multi-agent topologies. References 

Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Ar-nav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alex Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. 2026. GEPA: Reflective prompt evo-lution can outperform reinforcement learning. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Paweł Budzianowski, Tsung-Hsien Wen, Bo-Hsiang Tseng, Iñigo Casanueva, Stefan Ultes, Osman Ra-madan, and Milica Gaši´ c. 2018. MultiWOZ - a large-scale multi-domain Wizard-of-Oz dataset for task-oriented dialogue modelling. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5016–5026, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yubo Dong, Xukun Zhu, Zhengzhe Pan, Linchao Zhu, and Yi Yang. 2024. VillagerAgent: A graph-based multi-agent framework for coordinating complex task dependencies in Minecraft. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,pages 16290–16314, Bangkok, Thailand. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Mihail Eric, Rahul Goel, Shachi Paul, Abhishek Sethi, Sanchit Agarwal, Shuyang Gao, Adarsh Kumar, Anuj Goyal, Peter Ku, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2020. Mul-tiWOZ 2.1: A consolidated multi-domain dialogue dataset with state corrections and state tracking base-lines. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Re-sources and Evaluation Conference , pages 422–428, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association. Aman Gupta, Anirudh Ravichandran, Ziji Zhang, Swair Shah, Anurag Beniwal, and Narayanan Sadagopan. 2024. Dard: A multi-agent ap-proach for task-oriented dialog systems. Preprint ,arXiv:2411.00427. Lewis Hammond, Alan Chan, Jesse Clifton, Jason Hoelscher-Obermaier, Akbir Khan, Euan McLean, Chandler Smith, Wolfram Barfuss, Jakob Foerster, Tomáš Gavenˇ ciak, The Anh Han, Edward Hughes, Vojtˇ ech Kovaˇ rík, Jan Kulveit, Joel Z. Leibo, Cas-par Oesterheld, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Nisarg Shah, Michael Wellman, and 25 others. 2025. Multi-agent risks from advanced ai. Technical Report 1, Cooperative AI Foundation. Ting Han, Ximing Liu, Ryuichi Takanabu, Yixin Lian, Chongxuan Huang, Dazhen Wan, Wei Peng, and Min-lie Huang. 2021. Multiwoz 2.3: A multi-domain task-oriented dialogue dataset enhanced with anno-tation corrections and co-reference annotation. In 

Natural Language Processing and Chinese Comput-ing: 10th CCF International Conference, NLPCC 2021, Qingdao, China, October 13–17, 2021, Pro-ceedings, Part II , page 206–218, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag. Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vard-hamanan A, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Za-haria, and Christopher Potts. 2024. DSPy: Com-piling declarative language model calls into state-of-the-art pipelines. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Jun Liu, Zhenglun Kong, Changdi Yang, Fan Yang, Tianqi Li, Peiyan Dong, Joannah Nanjekye, Hao Tang, Geng Yuan, Wei Niu, Wenbin Zhang, Pu Zhao, Xue Lin, Dong Huang, and Yanzhi Wang. 2025. Rcr-router: Efficient role-aware context routing for multi-agent llm systems with structured memory. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.04903. Xufang Luo, Yuge Zhang, Zhiyuan He, Zilong Wang, Siyun Zhao, Dongsheng Li, Luna K. Qiu, and Yuqing Yang. 2025. Agent lightning: Train any ai agents with reinforcement learning. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.03680. Melissa Z Pan, Mert Cemri, Lakshya A Agrawal, Shuyi Yang, Bhavya Chopra, Rishabh Tiwari, Kurt Keutzer, Aditya Parameswaran, Kannan Ramchandran, Dan Klein, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Matei Zaharia, and Ion Stoica. 2025. Why do multiagent systems fail? In 

ICLR 2025 Workshop on Building Trust in Language Models and Applications .Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. 2023. Automatic prompt op-timization with “gradient descent” and beam search. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7957–7968, Singapore. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. ChatDev: Communicative agents for software development. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 15174–15186, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chen Qian, Zihao Xie, YiFei Wang, Wei Liu, Kunlun Zhu, Hanchen Xia, Yufan Dang, Zhuoyun Du, Weize Chen, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2025. Scaling large language model-based multi-agent collaboration. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kun-daje. 2017. Learning important features through propagating activation differences. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70 , ICML’17, page 3145–3153. JMLR.org. Xavier Sécheresse, Jacques-Yves Guilbert-Ly, and An-toine Villedieu de Torcy. 2025. Gaapo: Genetic al-gorithmic applied to prompt optimization. Preprint ,arXiv:2504.07157. Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2023. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm ap-plications via multi-agent conversation. Preprint ,arXiv:2308.08155. Jinyu Xiang, Jiayi Zhang, Zhaoyang Yu, Xinbing Liang, Fengwei Teng, Jinhao Tu, Fashen Ren, Xiangru Tang, Sirui Hong, Chenglin Wu, and Yuyu Luo. 2025. Self-supervised prompt optimization. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 9017–9041, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Guowei Xu, Mert Yuksekgonul, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. 2025. metatextgrad: Automatically op-timizing language model optimizers. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems .Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. 2024. Large language models as optimizers. Preprint ,arXiv:2309.03409. Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2025. τ -bench: A bench-mark for Tool- A gent-U ser interaction in real-world domains. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Eric Ye and Natasha Jaques. 2024. An efficient open world benchmark for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Open-World Agents .Fanghua Ye, Jarana Manotumruksa, and Emine Yilmaz. 2022. MultiWOZ 2.4: A multi-domain task-oriented dialogue dataset with essential annotation corrections to improve state tracking evaluation. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue , pages 351–360, Edinburgh, UK. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Haofei Yu, Zirui Cheng, Zhaochen Hong, Kunlun Zhu, Jinwei Yao, Tao Feng, and Jiaxuan You. 2025. Re-search town: Simulator of research community. Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. 2024. Textgrad: Automatic "differentiation" via text. Preprint , arXiv:2406.07496. Xiaoxue Zang, Abhinav Rastogi, Srinivas Sunkara, Raghav Gupta, Jianguo Zhang, and Jindong Chen. 2020. MultiWOZ 2.2 : A dialogue dataset with additional annotation corrections and state tracking baselines. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Conversational AI ,pages 109–117, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Shaokun Zhang, Ming Yin, Jieyu Zhang, Jiale Liu, Zhiguang Han, Jingyang Zhang, Beibin Li, Chi Wang, Huazheng Wang, Yiran Chen, and Qingyun Wu. 2025a. Which agent causes task failures and when? on automated failure attribution of LLM multi-agent systems. In Forty-second International Confer-ence on Machine Learning .Yaolun Zhang, Xiaogeng Liu, and Chaowei Xiao. 2025b. Metaagent: Automatically constructing multi-agent systems based on finite state machines. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learn-ing .Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and Jimmy Ba. 2023. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2024. Gptswarm: language agents as optimizable graphs. In Proceedings of the 41st Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org. 

A Experiment Setting Detail 

Unless otherwise specified, all experiments are con-ducted on a single compute node equipped with four NVIDIA A40 GPUs, 208 GB of system mem-ory, and 16 CPU cores. We use the same hardware configuration for both the optimization and infer-ence phases to ensure consistency across experi-mental runs. For local model serving, we enable FP8 quantization whenever supported by the target model and serving backend. We use GPT-4 as the optimizer model for prompt refinement throughout the optimization process. When using Qwen-3-32B, we turn off the thinking process in order to accelerate the experiments. 

B Verbal Loss Prompts 

This section presents the verbal-loss prompt tem-plates used for different task scenarios, including MultiWOZ and τ -bench. 

B.1 Verbal Loss Prompts for MultiWOZ 

For MultiWOZ, we design two types of verbal loss: Joint Goal Accuracy (JGA) loss and Inform & Suc-cess loss. JGA loss is computed at the turn level. We present the prompt templates for both losses below. 

B.1.1 JGA Loss 

The prompt template for JGA loss is shown below: Prompt Template for JGA Loss 

The system has made the following user in-tention predictions: 

> { prediction }

The ground truth user intentions are: 

> { ground_truth }

The false positive predictions are: 

> { false_positive }

The false negative predictions are: 

> { false_negative }

When using this template, "prediction" is replaced with the JSON string of the pre-dicted dialogue state for a given turn. Sim-ilarly, "ground_truth", "false_positive", and "false_negative" are replaced with the JSON strings of the ground-truth dialogue state, false-positive slot-value pairs, and false-negative slot names, re-spectively. An example dialogue state is shown below:     

> {" train - departure ": " cambridge ", " train - leaveAt ": "11:00" , " train - day ": " wednesday ", " train - destination ": " stansted airport " }

B.1.2 Inform & Success Loss 

The prompt template for Inform & Success loss is shown below: 

Prompt Template for Inform & Success Loss 

The system has made the following queries: 

> { provided_queries }

The ground truth queries are: 

> { requested_queries }

The system has provided the following infor-mation: 

> { provided_information }

The ground truth information is: 

> { requested_information }

When using this template, "provided_queries" and "requested_queries" are replaced with the JSON strings of the queries generated by the sys-tem and the corresponding ground-truth queries. An example is shown below:           

> {" hotel ": [{" area ": " east ", " internet ": " yes ", " parking ": " no " }, {" area ": " east ", " internet ": " yes ", " parking ": " no " }, {" area ": " east ", " internet ": " yes ", " parking ": " no " }]}

Similarly, "provided_information" and "re-quested_information" are replaced with the in-formation provided by the system and the corre-sponding ground-truth information. An example is shown below:   

> {" attraction ": [" POST "] , " taxi ": [" PHONE "] }

B.2 Verbal Loss Prompt for τ -bench 

The prompt template for reward loss is shown be-low: 

Prompt Template for Reward Loss 

The ground truth actions are: 

> { groundtruth_actions }

The predicted actions are: 

> { predicted_actions }

Whether the actions match: 

> { action_match }

The required text strings in the responses are: 

> { required_output_strings }

The predicted responses are: 

> { predicted_responses }

Whether the responses match: 

> { output_match }

When using this template, "groundtruth_actions" and "predicted_actions" are replaced with the ground-truth tool-call trajectories and the generated trajectories, respectively. An example is shown be-low:      

> [{" tool_name ": "exchange_delivered_order _items ", " tool_arguments ": {" order_id ": "# W9077205 ", " item_ids ": ["3877338112"] , " new_item_ids ": ["2444431651"] , " payment_method_id ": "gift_card_7108145 " }}]

Similarly, "action_match" and "output_match" are replaced with the corresponding binary re-wards, while "required_output_strings" and "pre-dicted_responses" are replaced with the list of re-quired text strings and the list of system utterances, respectively. 

C Language Model as Optimizer 

C.1 Pseudocode of Language Model as Optimizer 

Algorithm 2 presents the pseudocode for using a language model as an optimizer. 

Algorithm 2 Language Model as Optimizer                                                         

> Require: Initial agent prompts P0
> Require: agent tools A
> Require: Prompt template F(·)
> 1: Initialize agent prompts P←P(0)
> 2: Initialize optimization history H←[ ]
> 3: for t= 1 to Tdo
> 4: Run the MAS on the training samples and collect latest prompts Pt, latest performance rt, and latest attri-bution trajectories Tt
> 5: P←Pt
> 6: r←rt
> 7: T ← T t
> 8: Append (P, r )to optimization history H
> 9: M← F (P, A, H, T)
> 10: Query LLM with Mto obtain prompt updates ∆P
> 11: Update prompts: P←P+ ∆ P
> 12: end for
> 13: return P

C.2 Prompt of Language Model as Optimizer 

At each optimization step, the optimizer receives an instruction prompt and an input prompt. We present the corresponding prompt templates below. The instruction prompt is as follows: 

Prompt for Optimizer Instruction 

You are an expert in analyzing multi-agent systems and providing insights on how to improve agent performance through better prompts. You will be given the structure of a multi-agent system, including the names of different agents and their current prompts. You will be provided with some inference trajectories from the multi-agent system. Each trajectory consists of a sequence of outputs from different agents. Each output is conditioned on the previous outputs. At the end of each trajectory, there is a comparison between the final output and the expected output. You will also receive an optimization history that contains information about the agents and their prompts. Your task is to analyze these trajectories and provide insights on how the agents can avoid the mistakes and achieve better results by improving their prompts. Note that the order of the agents is fixed. So you should not suggest changing the order of the agents. If there’s no **Warning** section in the prompt, you can add such a section at the end of the prompt. You can add sentences to warn the agents about the mistakes in the trajectories. For example, if an agent often misses certain tool calls, you can encourage the agent to use certain tools under certain situations; if an agent often misses certain information in tool call inputs, you can warn the agent to pay attention to that information. You should format the warnings in bullet points in markdown format. For each warning, you should attach a failure case from the trajectories as an example. Note that the toolkit of each agent might be different. So you should not suggest using tools that are not available to the agent. However, the content within the {DONT_CHANGE_HEADER} and {DONT_CHANGE_FOOTER} tags and the tags themselves should be kept unchanged and preserved in the new prompt. You should also note that the causality in some trajectories is noisy. So you should not take the noisy causality into account. # Procedure You should follow these steps: 1. Identify the agents that need to improve their prompts. 2. For each selected agent, suggest a new prompt that could lead to better results. # Input Format You will receive the optimization history and trajectories in the following format: The struc-ture of the multi-agent system:         

> {" agent_name_1 ": " Current prompt for agent 1" , " agent_name_2 ": " Current prompt for agent 2" , ... }

The tools available to each agent:       

> {" agent_name_1 ": [... tool descriptions ...] , " agent_name_2 ": [... tool descriptions ...] , ... }

The optimization history and the correspond-ing performance:                                           

> [{" prompts ": {" agent_name_1 ": " Prompt for agent 1" , " agent_name_2 ": " Prompt for agent 2" , ... }, " performance ": "A brief description of the performance of the multi -agent system , including the expected output and the actual output ." , }, {" prompts ": {" agent_name_1 ": " Prompt for agent 1" , " agent_name_2 ": " Prompt for agent 2" , ... }, " performance ": "A brief description of the performance of the multi -agent system , including the expected output and the actual output ." , }, ... ]

The inference trajectories:                   

> [" agent_1 : output_1 -> agent_2 : output_2 -> ... -> agent_n : final_output -> loss : comparison_of_final_output_and _expected_output ", " agent_1 : output_1 -> agent_2 : output_2 -> ... -> agent_n : final_output -> loss : comparison_of_final_output_and _expected_output ", ... ]

# Output Format You should output a JSON object with the following structure:                 

> {" reasoning ": " Your reasoning about the agents and their prompts ." , " agent_prompts ": {" agent_name_x ": " New prompt for agent xcontaining the ** Warning ** section ." , ... }}

The input prompt template is as follows: 

Prompt Template for Inform & Success Loss 

The structure of the multi-agent system: 

> { agent_structure }

The tools available to each agent: 

> { agent_tools }

The optimization history and the correspond-ing performance: 

> { optimization_history }

The inference trajectories: 

> { inference_trajectories }

D Time Cost 

Table 3 reports the running time of completing 10 steps of optimization under different connection weight settings on MultiWOZ and τ -bench. Over-all, Llama-3.3-70B-It requires substantially longer running time than Qwen-3-32B across both bench-marks, which is expected given the larger model size. On MultiWOZ, the running times are rel-atively stable across different connection weight choices: Llama-3.3-70B-It takes around 16.3–16.7 hours, while Qwen-3-32B takes around 8.0–9.5 hours. On τ -bench, the runtime varies more no-ticeably for Llama-3.3-70B-It, ranging from 10.3 to 16.3 hours depending on the connection weight, whereas Qwen-3-32B remains consistently around 5–6 hours. These results indicate that the choice of connection weight does not introduce a substantial additional computational burden, and the overall runtime is primarily determined by the benchmark and the underlying model.                    

> Model Connection Weight Time MultiWOZ
> Llama-3.3-70B-It Mean of L1 Norm 16h39m20s
> Max of L1 Norm 16h40m46s
> Mean of Product with Input 16h26m19s
> Max of Product with Input 16h19m55s
> Qwen-3-32B Mean of L1 Norm 08h45m25s
> Max of L1 Norm 08h00m16s
> Mean of Product with Input 09h27m18s
> Max of Product with Input 08h26m49s
> τ-bench
> Llama-3.3-70B-It Mean of L1 Norm 16h20m07s
> Max of L1 Norm 12h52m50s
> Mean of Product with Input 14h47m31s
> Max of Product with Input 10h16m37s
> Qwen-3-32B Mean of L1 Norm 05h09m28s
> Max of L1 Norm 05h59m47s
> Mean of Product with Input 05h06m50s
> Max of Product with Input 06h04m16s

Table 3: Running time of optimization under different connection weight settings on MultiWOZ and τ -bench.