Title: RoamFlow: Reinforcement-Aligned One-Step Action MeanFlow Policy for Image-Goal Navigation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29934v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 02:14:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# RoamFlow: Reinforcement-Aligned One-Step Action MeanFlow Policy for Image-Goal Navigation 

Zixuan Zhang ∗, Yuqi Chen ∗, Junjie Gao, Siyuan Song, Yongzhou Pan, Beichen Wang, and Mir Feroskhan †

Abstract — Image-goal navigation is a key challenge in em-bodied robotics, where an agent must reach a target spec-ified solely by a goal image. While existing reinforcement learning approaches map perceptual observations directly to actions, they struggle to model long-horizon dependencies, often leading to suboptimal trajectories. To address this limitation, we propose RoamFlow, a generative navigation framework that leverages MeanFlow to predict the average velocity field for trajectory synthesis, enabling efficient few-step generation and reducing inference latency. We further adopt a two-stage training strategy that combines expert imitation for stable initialization with reinforcement learning for task-specific policy refinement. Extensive experiments in both Habitat simulation and real-world robotic platforms demonstrate that RoamFlow achieves efficient inference while maintaining strong navigation performance under real-time constraints. 

I. INTRODUCTION Image-goal navigation [1] is a central problem in embod-ied robotics, where an agent must reach a target location specified solely by a goal image using onboard sensory observations. Existing reinforcement learning approaches [2], [3], [4] typically adopt end-to-end policies that map percep-tual observations directly to actions. While such methods demonstrate robustness to perceptual noise and environment uncertainty, their step-wise action prediction paradigm strug-gles to capture long-horizon dependencies. As a result, these policies often exhibit myopic behaviors and produce subop-timal trajectories in complex environments where multi-step planning and global reasoning are required. To address this limitation, recent studies reformulate navigation as a trajectory distribution modeling problem within generative frameworks. Instead of predicting single-step actions, generative policies synthesize coherent multi-step action sequences, enabling trajectory-level reasoning and alleviating short-sighted decision-making. Representa-tive approaches include diffusion-based methods such as NoMaD [5] and conditional flow matching methods such as FlowNav [6]. By modeling a distribution over trajectories, these methods improve long-horizon coherence and allow multimodal trajectory prediction. However, despite these advantages, generative navigation policies still face two fundamental challenges. First, their inference efficiency remains limited by inherently iterative generation processes. Diffusion-based policies require mul-tiple denoising steps to generate each trajectory, while flow- 

> ∗Zixuan Zhang and Yuqi Chen contributed equally to this work.
> †Mir Feroskhan is the corresponding author. Zixuan Zhang, Yuqi Chen, Junjie Gao, Siyuan Song, Yongzhou Pan, Beichen Wang, Mir Feroskhan are with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
> Fig. 1. Comparison of different generative policies for image-goal naviga-tion: (a) Traditional Diffusion Policy, which requires multiple iterations, leading to long inference time; (b) Distillation Diffusion Policy, which reduces inference time to a single step but sacrifices trajectory quality; (c) RoamFlow Policy, the proposed method, which utilizes a single-step generation mechanism while maintaining high-quality performance.

based methods still depend on step-wise numerical inte-gration of learned velocity fields. Such iterative procedures introduce non-negligible computational latency, hindering real-time deployment on resource-constrained robotic plat-forms. Distillation-based acceleration methods [7], [8], [9] attempt to reduce inference steps by approximating multi-step teacher distributions, but aggressive compression often degrades trajectory quality and diversity. Second, most gener-ative navigation policies rely primarily on imitation learning. Although offline demonstrations provide useful trajectory priors, imitation alone cannot correct suboptimal expert be-haviors or adapt to unseen environments during deployment. As a result, policies trained purely with imitation may accumulate long-horizon errors and fail to align trajectory generation with task-level objectives such as efficient goal reaching and collision avoidance. Motivated by these limitations, we propose RoamFlow, a generative navigation framework that combines efficient  

> arXiv:2606.29934v1 [cs.RO] 29 Jun 2026 Fig. 2. Overview of the two-stage training pipeline. The policy is pretrained via imitation learning (IL) and then fine-tuned with reinforcement learning (RL). The current RGB-D observation and the goal image are encoded and fused into a joint latent representation, which conditions a MeanFlow-based trajectory generator to produce candidate trajectories and a trajectory evaluator head to select safe, goal-directed behaviors.

trajectory generation with reinforcement learning for task-driven refinement. RoamFlow leverages the MeanFlow [10] model to predict the average velocity field that transports Gaussian noise to the target action sequence. By modeling interval-level displacement instead of instantaneous velocity, the proposed policy significantly reduces the number of required transport steps, leading to more efficient inference while preserving trajectory quality. To further enhance task performance, RoamFlow adopts a two-stage training strategy. The policy is first initialized via offline imitation learning to capture expert navigation priors. Subsequently, reinforcement learning is applied in the Habitat simulation environment [11] to refine the trajectory policy using task-specific re-wards, enabling the agent to better align trajectory generation with navigation objectives. In this work, our contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We propose a MeanFlow-based generative navigation policy that predicts the average velocity field, enabling efficient few-step trajectory generation and reducing inference latency.  

> •

We introduce a two-stage training framework that com-bines offline imitation learning for stable initialization with reinforcement learning for task-driven policy re-finement.  

> •

We validate the proposed framework in both Habitat simulation and real-world robotic experiments, demon-strating efficient inference and strong navigation perfor-mance. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Generative Policies for Navigation 

Recent studies have explored diffusion models [12] for trajectory generation in navigation tasks, where policies iter-atively transform Gaussian noise into structured trajectories, effectively capturing complex, multi-modal action distribu-tions. For example, NoMaD [5] formulates navigation as a diffusion-based policy and generates multi-modal action sequences conditioned on visual observations, improving robustness in previously unseen environments. NaviDiffu-sor [13] further incorporates gradient guidance derived from environmental constraints and task costs during the diffusion process, thereby enhancing the safety and feasibility of the generated trajectories. NaviBridger [14] introduces a diffu-sion bridge [15] formulation that conditions the generative process on an informative prior action distribution rather than pure Gaussian noise, which improves generation stability and facilitates long-horizon trajectory synthesis. To further im-prove sampling efficiency, recent work has investigated flow-based generative formulations for navigation. In particular, FlowNav [6] adopts Conditional Flow Matching (CFM) [16] to learn continuous transport dynamics in trajectory space, enabling more efficient trajectory generation while preserv-ing expressive modeling capacity. Despite these advances in trajectory modeling, most existing methods still rely on iterative sampling or numerical integration during inference, which introduces considerable computational overhead and poses challenges for real-time deployment on resource-constrained robotic platforms. B. Fast Sampling for Diffusion Models 

Reducing the inference cost of generative models has become an important research direction, motivating a number of approaches that aim to reduce the number of sampling steps. A common strategy is knowledge distillation [17], [18], which compresses a multi-step generative process into a few-step or single-step generator. For example, Progres-sive Distillation [19] progressively compresses the sampling procedure of diffusion models, enabling significantly faster generation. Distribution Matching Distillation (DMD) [7] further learns a one-step generator by matching the output distribution of the original diffusion model. In addition, Consistency Models [20] learn a consistency mapping that enables few-step or even single-step sampling while pre-serving the learned data distribution. Beyond distillation-based approaches, recent work has explored intrinsically one-step generative formulations. In particular, MeanFlow mod-els [10] the average velocity field of the transport dynamics between distributions, allowing samples to be generated with a single forward pass of the network. 

C. Reinforcement Learning for Generative Policies 

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL)[21], [22] has recently been explored to further improve generative policies beyond imitation learning. Diffusion policies are typically trained using offline data, which limits their performance when the expert dataset does not fully cover the state space. To address this limitation, several studies incorporate DRL to re-fine pre-trained generative policies using task-driven reward signals. For example, Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization (DPPO)[23] formulates the diffusion denoising process as a Markov decision process and applies policy gradient methods for policy improvement. FDPP [24] refines diffusion policies by using human preference feedback, learning a reward model to align the policy with subjective tasks while main-taining task performance. NCDPO [25] optimizes the policy in the noise-conditioned space, applying DRL with back-propagation through diffusion timesteps, enabling efficient adaptation without modifying the original architecture. In ad-dition, ReinFlow [26] proposes an online DRL framework for fine-tuning flow-matching policies, allowing reward-aware trajectory optimization for robotic control tasks. III. METHODOLOGY In this section, we first provide an overview of the Roam-Flow architecture. The proposed framework is trained in two stages. In the first stage, a MeanFlow-based generator and an additional evaluation head for safety-aware trajectory selec-tion are trained via imitation learning. In the second stage, reinforcement learning is used to further refine the navigation policy, improving task-level navigation performance. 

A. RoamFlow Architecture 

Our architecture is illustrated in Figure 2. The policy maps the current observation to future control actions. Let 

ot denote the policy observation at time t, and at represent a single action. We define a trajectory action sequence as 

At = {at, . . . , a t+T −1}. The architecture consists of three main components: 

a) Observation Encoding: The policy operates on the current RGB image Irgb  

> obs

, depth image Idepth  

> obs

, and goal RGB image Irgb  

> goal

. We first encode Irgb  

> obs

and Idepth  

> obs

with two separate EfficientNet-B0 backbones [27] to obtain two corresponding embeddings, which are then concatenated and linearly projected into a joint observation feature. In parallel, we concatenate Irgb  

> obs

and Irgb  

> goal

and feed the resulting input into another EfficientNet-B0 encoder to generate a goal embedding. These two embeddings are concatenated and then fed into the Transformer [28] block to derive a latent representation Ct.

b) RoamFlow Policy: RoamFlow Policy leverages the output token Ct from the Transformer and incorporates observation conditions through FiLM (Feature-wise Linear Modulation) [29]. The system takes Gaussian noise as input and uses a UNet [30] to predict the mean velocity field that maps the noise distribution to the target distribution. Unlike traditional autoregressive action prediction, trajectory generation is formulated as a single-step process, directly mapping the stochastic noise to a trajectory sequence At.This design not only enhances generation efficiency but also ensures that the generated trajectories are effectively conditioned on specific observations and task requirements. 

c) Trajectory Evaluator: We employ a multi-layer per-ceptron (MLP) as the trajectory evaluator head to evaluate the feasibility of candidate trajectories. The input to this trajectory evaluator consists of visual token representations and multiple trajectories generated by the RoamFlow Policy. By leveraging both the shared visual features and trajectory information, the trajectory evaluator assigns a score to each trajectory. During inference, the trajectory with the high-est score is selected as the final output. This mechanism enhances robustness in multimodal trajectory prediction by effectively selecting the optimal trajectory from multiple candidates, thereby mitigating potential instability arising from the diversity in trajectory predictions. Together, these components constitute a cohesive system that efficiently encodes observations, generates trajectories, and evaluates their feasibility, enabling robust image-goal navigation. 

B. Offline Policy Learning 

MeanFlow Generator. The traditional CFM approach for-mulates trajectory generation as a continuous transport pro-cess that maps a noise prior to expert navigation trajectories. Following such paradigm, the trajectory state xt evolves according to an ordinary differential equation (ODE): 

ddt xt = v(xt, t ), (1) Where v(xt, t ) denotes the instantaneous velocity field, gov-erning the generation of the trajectory over time. Starting from a Gaussian noise sample x0 ∼ N (0 , I ), the trajectories are obtained by integrating this velocity field, transforming the noise distribution into expert navigation trajectories. However, instantaneous velocity formulations require nu-merical integration of the velocity field, typically involving multiple transport steps during inference. This increases computational cost and limits real-time deployment. To ad-dress this issue, we adopt MeanFlow, which predicts the average velocity field instead of the instantaneous velocity. By modeling interval-level displacement, MeanFlow enables efficient trajectory generation with significantly fewer trans-port steps while preserving trajectory quality. MeanFlow predicts interval-level displacement rather than instantaneous velocity. Specifically, the average velocity be-tween two time steps r and t is defined as 

u(xt, r, t ) = 1

t − r

Z tr

v(xτ , τ ) dτ, (2) which represents the normalized displacement induced by the transport process. By construction, the average velocity is consistent with the instantaneous velocity in the limit r → t,i.e., 

lim  

> r→t

u(xt, r, t ) = v(xt, t ), (3) establishing a principled connection between displacement-based and velocity-based trajectory modeling. In practice, we train a neural network uθ to predict this average velocity field conditioned on observations, enabling trajectory synthesis with a small number of transport steps. This identity provides a natural training target for learning displacement-aware trajectory dynamics.We therefore opti-mize uθ using the objective 

LMF = Ext,r,t 

h

∥uθ (xt, r, t ) − u(xt, r, t )∥2i

, (4) which encourages the policy to capture interval-level motion structure. By modeling u rather than v, the policy enables trajectory synthesis with substantially fewer transport steps, improving inference speed without sacrificing trajectory fidelity, which is particularly important for real-time navigation. 

Trajectory Evaluator. Given observation o and a candidate trajectory τ = {τk, a k}Tk=0 , the trajectory evaluator predicts a scalar score sϕ(o, τ ) used to rank trajectory hypotheses. Supervision is constructed from geometric clearance signals obtained from a distance field. Let dk = dobs (τk) denote the distance to the nearest obstacle. We define a trajectory-level target 

˜s(τ ) = ssafe (τ ) − λ s smooth (τ ), (5) with 

ssafe (τ ) = −

> T

X

> k=0

ψ(dsafe − dk) + α 

> T−1

X

> k=0

(dk+1 − dk) , (6) 

ssmooth (τ ) =  

> T−1

X

> k=1

∥ak+1 − 2ak + ak−1∥2, (7) where ψ(·) is a smooth barrier function increasing when clearance falls below a safety threshold dsafe . The evaluator is trained via regression 

Leval = E(o,τ )

 (sϕ(o, τ ) − ˜s(τ )) 2 , (8) 

Algorithm 1 ROAM: Two-Stage Trajectory Policy Optimiza-tion                                                                                 

> Input expert dataset D={(ot, A ⋆t)}; environment E; transport steps K; discount γ; batch size B; clipping range ϵ∈(0 ,1) .
> Initialize trajectory policy composed of backbone fψ(o)→Z,MeanFlow generator uθ, and trajectory evaluator sϕ(o, τ |Z).
> Initialize MeanFlow generator parameters θ, stochastic noise head θ′, and evaluator parameters ϕ.
> Stage I: Generator and Evaluator Training while not converged do
> Sample (o, A ⋆)∼ D and compute Z=fψ(o).Sample X0∼pprior , sample (r, t ), construct Xt.Update θby minimizing ∥uθ(Xt, r, t |Z)−u(Xt, r, t )∥2.Generate trajectory proposals {τi}and compute targets ˜s(τi).Update ϕby regression on sϕ(o, τ i|Z).
> end while Stage II: Online Policy Refinement
> Freeze Transformer parameters ψand evaluator ϕ.
> while not converged do
> ¯θold ←¯θ
> Reset environment and observe o.
> while episode not terminated do
> Z←fψ(o);X0∼ N (0 , I )
> Generate trajectory τvia stochastic MeanFlow transport Execute τ, observe (r, d, o ), and store transition in buffer
> end while
> Sample mini-batch; evaluate log π¯θ(τ|o)
> Estimate advantages and update ¯θwith clipped PPO
> end while

enabling reliable ranking of candidate trajectories at infer-ence time. At inference time, the generator produces multiple trajec-tory proposals and the evaluator selects the trajectory with the highest score 

τ ∗ = arg max 

> τi

sϕ(o, τ i), (9) providing a safety-aware selection layer that improves ro-bustness under multimodal predictions. The evaluator is trained offline and used solely for trajectory selection during deployment. 

C. Online Policy Refinement 

While the offline stage learns a trajectory prior from expert demonstrations, imitation alone cannot correct suboptimal behaviors or long-horizon decision errors in real naviga-tion. Therefore, we further incorporate online reinforcement learning to refine the navigation policy. we formulate tra-jectory generation as a finite-horizon stochastic transport process over latent trajectory states. Let {Xkt }Kk=0 denote the intermediate trajectory states, where XKt = τt is the final trajectory executed in the environment. This formulation treats trajectory synthesis as a discrete-time Markov process whose transitions define a tractable trajectory distribution. However, the deterministic MeanFlow formulation in Eq. (2) specifies only a transport mapping and does not provide an explicit stochastic transition model, preventing likelihood-based policy optimization. To obtain a stochastic process, we introduce learnable noise into the transport dynamics, where the transition variance is predicted by a learnable noise network gθ′ (·), resulting in Gaussian transi-tions conditioned on the current latent state. 

Xk+1  

> t

∼ N 



Xkt + Uθ (Xkt , Z t, t k)∆ tk, Σθ′ (Xkt , Z t, t k)



,

(10) with initialization X0 

> t

∼ N (0 , I ). This converts deterministic transport into a stochastic Markov chain over trajectory latents. Because each transition is reparameterized, the trajectory distribution is factorized as a product of transition densities, 

log π¯θ (τt | ot) = log N (X0 

> t

; 0 , I )+

> K−1

X

> k=0

log N



Xk+1  

> t

; μk 

> ¯θ

, Σkθ′



, (11) where μk 

> ¯θ

= Xkt + Uθ (Xkt , Z t, t k)∆ tk and ¯θ = {θ, θ ′}.At inference time, the stochastic transport chain collapses into a deterministic policy mapping, which directly maps an initial latent sample to a trajectory: 

τt = fθ (X0 

> t

, Z t), f θ (X, Z ) = X + Uθ (X, Z ). (12) At each environment step, the reward is defined as 

rt = rsuccess  

> t

+ rslack  

> t

+ rprogress  

> t

+ rcollision  

> t

, (13) where rsuccess  

> t

is a positive reward assigned when the agent reaches the goal at step t, rslack  

> t

is a constant per-step penalty to encourage faster task completion, rprogress  

> t

= ∆ dt measures the change in distance to the goal between two consecutive steps, rcollision  

> t

is a penalty term applied when a collision occurs at step t. The episode return is 

Gt = 

> T−1

X

> j=0

γj rt+j , (14) and the trajectory-level advantage At is estimated from the collected rollouts. The trajectory generation policy is optimized using the clipped PPO objective 

LPPO = Et[min( rtAt, clip( rt, 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)At)] , (15) where the importance ratio is rt = π¯θ (τt|ot)  

> π¯θold (τt|ot)

.

IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Simulation Setup 

We formulate the image-goal navigation task as a goal-conditioned policy learning problem. Without global local-ization, the agent navigates on a pre-built topological graph. In each episode, given a distant goal image Ig , the agent performs self-localization on the map to select the next sub-goal image. The RoamFlow policy then predicts trajectory waypoints, which are tracked by a PD controller to produce velocity commands for goal-directed navigation. For Habitat, we use an RGB-D camera with a 90 ◦ horizon-tal field of view for perception. The action space consists of continuous linear and angular velocities (vt, ω t). An episode is considered successful when the agent issues the Stop action  

> Fig. 3. Reward curve during training.The steady rise during the RL stage demonstrates effective policy alignment with task objectives.

and its final pose is within ds = 1 .0 m in position and within 

αs = 30 ◦ in heading relative to the target observation pose. We evaluate navigation using Success Rate (SR), Success weighted by Path Length (SPL), Collision Rate (CR), and Inference Time (ms). A collision is recorded whenever the simulator reports contact, and CR is computed as the proportion of episodes containing at least one collision. 

B. Training Details 1) Datasets: We utilize a diverse collection of indoor environments for training and evaluation, including the Gib-son [31] and Matterport3D (MP3D) [32] simulation datasets. During data collection, we run Hybrid A* on the scene NavMesh to generate smooth and collision-free expert tra-jectories. The planned trajectories are temporally aligned with the recorded RGB-D observations, forming an expert trajectory dataset. The RGB image at the terminal step of each trajectory is used as the episode goal image. We further incorporate episodes from real-world datasets GoStanford [33] and Scand [34] to diversify the training data and reduce the simulation-to-reality gap. As the GoStanford dataset lacks native depth information, we employ Depth Anything V2 [35] to generate high-fidelity depth maps. 

2) Imitation Learning: Thee model is first pre-trained with imitation learning using the AdamW optimizer, a learn-ing rate of 1 × 10 −5 , a batch size of 128, and 25 training epochs. The training is conducted on an NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPU for 20 hours. 

3) Reinforcement Learning: We then fine-tune the pre-trained policy in Habitat. Exploration noise is injected with standard deviations ranging from 0.08 to 0.14. We adopt PPO with a discount factor of 0.99, a GAE parameter of 0.95, and a batch size of 1000. The reward function consists of a success reward of 5, a per-step slack penalty of −0.01 , and a collision penalty of −0.1. All RL experiments are conducted on the same GPU for 30 hours. TABLE I COMPARISON BETWEEN ROAM FLOW AND BASELINES ON GIBSON AND MP3D. A LL METHODS ARE TRAINED ON THE GIBSON TRAINING SPLIT .RESULTS ON THE UNSEEN GIBSON TEST SCENES REFLECT IN -DOMAIN PERFORMANCE , WHEREAS MP3D EVALUATES CROSS -DOMAIN GENERALIZATION WITHOUT FINETUNE .

Method Depth Input Trajectory Selection Gibson MP3D SR(%) ↑ SPL(%) ↑ CR(%) ↓ Time(ms) ↓ SR(%) ↑ SPL(%) ↑ CR(%) ↓ Time(ms) ↓

NoMaD [5] No Random 43.1 29.4 17.3 49.1 34.8 19.7 25.1 49.4 NoMaD [5] + Distillation No Random 38.4 25.3 21.3 28.1 30.4 13.5 27.8 29.1 FlowNav [6] Yes Random 50.7 34.1 16.1 47.7 35.1 24.1 20.3 46.1 FlowNav [6] + Distillation Yes Random 47.5 29.7 20.1 21.2 30.2 19.2 24.3 20.2 NaviDiffusor [13] Yes Cost-Guided 51.1 45.4 11.8 89.5 46.1 34.6 13.3 90.1 NaviBridger [14] No N/A 47.4 37.6 15.8 44.3 40.8 23.3 20.5 43.3 NavDp [36] Yes Critic-Guided 59.3 47.5 11.6 61.1 48.1 34.1 17.5 62.5 

RoamFlow (Ours) Yes Critic-Guided 68.7 61.9 10.9 19.6 56.1 47.1 12.2 19.1 

C. Baseline 

We compare RoamFlow with the following baselines in the Habitat simulator: 

1) Generative Navigation Baselines: Diffusion-based navigation policies (NoMaD [5], NaviDiffusor [13], and NavDP [36]) typically rely on iterative diffusion sampling to generate action or trajectory sequences, which can model multimodal behaviors but often incurs substantial inference overhead. FlowNav [6] replaces diffusion sampling with Conditional Flow Matching, achieving comparable perfor-mance with fewer inference steps. NaviBridger [14] starts from informative prior actions and leverages a diffusion bridge to gradually transport the source distribution to-ward the target action distribution, improving the efficiency-performance trade-off by reducing unnecessary sampling steps. 

2) Distilled Generative Policies: For diffusion distillation, we adopt a progressive distillation [19], compressing a teacher diffusion policy with multi-step denoising into a student that performs few-step update. We additionally im-plement a baseline that distills a pretrained flow-matching policy into a one-step generator using score distillation [37]. 

D. Simulation Result 

Fig. 4 illustrates representative simulation rollouts. At each step, our policy proposes multiple candidate trajectories and executes the safe, goal-directed option, resulting in smooth and collision-averse navigation in cluttered scenes. 

1) Baseline Comparison: To ensure a fair comparison, we evaluate the proposed method and baselines under a unified experimental protocol. All models are trained on the same dataset split and tested in identical environments. During evaluation, identical goal image and pre-built topological graph are provided to all methods. Notably, the originally mapless baselines (NavDP [36] and NaviBridger [14]), are adapted to function as local planners within topological framework. For methods that do not natively require depth, we evaluate them without providing depth inputs and explic-itly mark these settings in the results. From Table I, we can see that RoamFlow achieves the highest performance on the Gibson validation split. Com-pared with the strongest generative baseline, NavDP, it in-creases SR by 9.4 and SPL by 14.4, while reducing CR from  

> Fig. 4. Navigation examples in simulation. At each step, our policy gen-erates several candidate trajectories and selects one to execute (highlighted in blue). The selected trajectory is consistently safe and goal-directed.

11.6 to 10.9 and reducing inference time from 61.1ms to 19.6ms. These results demonstrate that RoamFlow improves navigation quality, efficiency and safety. We also demonstrate the reward progression during the RL stage in Fig. 3. The average episode reward increases steadily over training, indicating that RL fine-tuning consistently improves policy performance. Notably, RoamFlow (orange) achieves the highest reward throughout training with faster and more stable gains, suggesting quicker convergence and superior final policy quality. Among the distilled baselines, FlowMatching distillation (blue) consistently outperforms diffusion distillation (red), while training without pre-training (green) remains at negative reward values. 

2) Ablation Study: Our ablation study evaluates the im-pact of three factors: imitation learning (IL) pretraining, reinforcement learning (RL) fine-tuning, and the use of a trajectory evaluator for selecting candidate trajectories. 

a) Effect of IL Stage: As shown in Table II, IL pre-training shows clear gains over training from scratch. Without IL, the agent must learn basic collision-avoidance behaviors via trial-and-error, leading to slower and less stable learning. IL bootstraps these skills and improves exploration efficiency. 

b) Effect of RL Stage: As shown in Table II, starting from the same IL initialization, RL fine-tuning leads to con-sistent improvements across both datasets, achieving higher Fig. 5. Deployment on real robots. This figure shows RoamFlow rollouts in three scenarios. The red boxed image indicates the goal image. The orange boxed image visualizes the trajectory prediction process, where the blue trajectory denotes the selected and executed trajectory. 

SR and SPL while significantly reducing CR compared to the IL-only variant. These results indicate that RL effectively complements imitation by refining the policy through task-oriented rewards, which enhances robustness and safety via direct environment interaction in cluttered indoor scenes. Consequently, the RL stage serves as an objective-alignment step that bridges the gap between the IL prior and practi-cal deployment requirements, further optimizing the policy toward target evaluation metrics. 

c) Effect of Trajectory Evaluator: As summarized in Table II, introducing the evaluator does not change the underlying policy, but re-ranks a set of candidate rollouts and executes the one with lower estimated risk. Compared to random selection, this simple selection mechanism consis-tently reduces the CR, indicating improved safety in visually cluttered indoor scenes. Meanwhile, by avoiding collision-induced failures and getting stuck less often, the agent achieves improvement in SR and SPL. Overall, the Trajectory Evaluator acts as a lightweight safety filter that improves tra-jectory reliability with minimal additional overhead, making the system more suitable for deployment.                                     

> TABLE II ABLATION OF IL, RL, AND TRAJECTORY EVALUATOR ON GIBSON AND
> MP3D. Method Gibson MP3D SR ↑SPL ↑CR ↓SR ↑SPL ↑CR ↓
> Effect of IL Stage
> w/o IL Stage 13.2 11.2 61.3 11.2 9.8 68.7
> Effect of RL Stage
> w/o RL Stage 51.3 47.5 25.9 46.8 43.5 30.6
> Effect of Trajectory Evaluator
> Random Selection 60.7 50.2 17.5 53.2 40.6 24.4
> Full RoamFlow (Ours) 68.7 61.9 10.9 56.1 47.1 12.2

E. Physical Experiments 

For real-robot experiments, our navigation policy is de-ployed on a Unitree Go2 quadruped equipped with an NVIDIA Jetson Orin NX (16GB). We use ROS1 Noetic as the middleware for sensor data streaming and command communication. An Intel RealSense D435i provides synchro-nized RGB-D observation inputs. We evaluate multiple navigation methods across three distinct scenarios under the image-goal navigation task. Each method is tested for a total of 20 runs distributed across the three scenarios to ensure statistical reliability. We report Success Rate (SR), the average number of collisions per run (C/run), and the mean inference time as the primary performance metrics. Table III reports success rate, collisions per run, and inference time. RoamFlow attains a higher SR with fewer collisions and lower inference time.  

> TABLE III
> PERFORMANCE IN PHYSICAL EXPERIMENTS (SUCCESS RATE ,
> COLLISIONS AND INFERENCE TIME (MS )).

Method SR ↑ C/run ↓ Time ↓

NoMaD(with Depth) 0.75 0.50 91.1 NoMaD + Distillation(with Depth) 0.70 0.70 67.2 FlowNav 0.90 0.25 89.5 FlowNav + Distillation 0.80 0.35 38.6 

RoamFlow (ours) 1.00 0.10 37.2 

Fig. 5 illustrates three successful navigation trajectories of our policy during execution. As shown, the robot consistently avoids unsafe regions while progressing toward the goal. During the real-world deployment, the whole navigation and control loop is executed onboard at a frequency of 10 Hz. The inference latency consistently remains below 100 ms. Despite minor jitter in computation timing, the system maintains a stable inference rate, satisfying the real-time constraints required for autonomous navigation. V. CONCLUSIONS We presented RoamFlow, a MeanFlow-based generative navigation framework for image-goal navigation that en-ables efficient one-step trajectory generation under real-time constraints. RoamFlow predicts interval-level displacement via an average velocity field, reducing the number of re-quired transport steps during inference. To improve task-level performance, we adopt a two-stage training strategy that combines imitation learning for stable initialization with reinforcement learning for reward-driven policy refinement. In addition, a lightweight trajectory evaluator re-ranks can-didate trajectories to select safe and smooth behaviors at inference time. Extensive experiments in Habitat and real-world environments demonstrate that RoamFlow achieves strong navigation performance with low inference latency, offering a practical solution for deploying generative navi-gation policies on resource-constrained onboard systems. REFERENCES [1] Y. Zhu, R. Mottaghi, E. Kolve, J. J. Lim, A. Gupta, L. Fei-Fei, and A. Farhadi, “Target-driven visual navigation in indoor scenes using deep reinforcement learning,” in 2017 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 3357–3364. [2] Z. Yan, R. Huang, L. He, S. Guo, and L. Zhao, “Sign: Safety-aware image-goal navigation for autonomous drones via reinforcement learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1962–1969, 2025. [3] L. Mezghan, S. Sukhbaatar, T. Lavril, O. Maksymets, D. Batra, P. Bojanowski, and K. Alahari, “Memory-augmented reinforcement learning for image-goal navigation,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 3316–3323. [4] Y. Chen, J. Gao, Y. Deng, and M. Feroskhan, “An improved reinforce-ment learning-based uav obstacle avoidance framework using ppo-cma,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 5845–5850. [5] A. Sridhar, D. Shah, C. Glossop, and S. Levine, “Nomad: Goal masked diffusion policies for navigation and exploration,” pp. 63–70, 2024. [6] S. Gode, A. Nayak, D. N. Oliveira, M. Krawez, C. Schmid, and W. Burgard, “Flownav: Combining flow matching and depth priors for efficient navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.09524 , 2024. [7] Z. Wang, Z. Li, A. Mandlekar, Z. Xu, J. Fan, Y. Narang, L. Fan, Y. Zhu, Y. Balaji, M. Zhou et al. , “One-step diffusion policy: Fast visuomotor policies via diffusion distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21257 , 2024. [8] A. Prasad, K. Lin, J. Wu, L. Zhou, and J. Bohg, “Consistency policy: Accelerated visuomotor policies via consistency distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07503 , 2024. [9] H. Zhou, D. Blessing, G. Li, O. Celik, X. Jia, G. Neumann, and R. Lioutikov, “Variational distillation of diffusion policies into mixture of experts,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 37, pp. 12 739–12 766, 2024. [10] Z. Geng, M. Deng, X. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and K. He, “Mean flows for one-step generative modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13447 ,2025. [11] M. Savva, A. Kadian, O. Maksymets, Y. Zhao, E. Wijmans, B. Jain, J. Straub, J. Liu, V. Koltun, J. Malik, D. Parikh, and D. Batra, “Habitat: A Platform for Embodied AI Research,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,2019. [12] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020. [13] Y. Zeng, H. Ren, S. Wang, J. Huang, and H. Cheng, “Navidiffusor: Cost-guided diffusion model for visual navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10003 , 2025. [14] H. Ren, Y. Zeng, Z. Bi, Z. Wan, J. Huang, and H. Cheng, “Prior does matter: Visual navigation via denoising diffusion bridge models,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , 2025, pp. 12 100–12 110. [15] L. Zhou, A. Lou, S. Khanna, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion bridge models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16948 , 2023. [16] Y. Lipman, R. T. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le, “Flow matching for generative modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747 ,2022. [17] T. Huang, Y. Zhang, M. Zheng, S. You, F. Wang, C. Qian, and C. Xu, “Knowledge diffusion for distillation,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, pp. 65 299–65 316, 2023. [18] W. Luo, Z. Huang, Z. Geng, J. Z. Kolter, and G.-j. Qi, “One-step diffusion distillation through score implicit matching,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 115 377–115 408, 2024. [19] T. Salimans and J. Ho, “Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00512 , 2022. [20] Y. Song, P. Dhariwal, M. Chen, and I. Sutskever, “Consistency models,” 2023. [21] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [22] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor,” in International conference on machine learning . Pmlr, 2018, pp. 1861–1870. [23] A. Z. Ren, J. Lidard, L. L. Ankile, A. Simeonov, P. Agrawal, A. Majumdar, B. Burchfiel, H. Dai, and M. Simchowitz, “Diffusion policy policy optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00588 , 2024. [24] Y. Chen, D. K. Jha, M. Tomizuka, and D. Romeres, “Fdpp: Fine-tune diffusion policy with human preference,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 12 010–12 016. [25] N. Yang, J. Gao, F. Gao, Y. Wu, and C. Yu, “Fine-tuning diffusion policies with backpropagation through diffusion timesteps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10482 , 2025. [26] T. Zhang, C. Yu, S. Su, and Y. Wang, “Reinflow: Fine-tuning flow matching policy with online reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22094 , 2025. [27] M. Tan, Q. E. Le et al. , “Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the International conference on machine learning, Long Beach, CA, USA , vol. 15, 2019. [28] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” 

Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [29] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. De Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville, “Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018. [30] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in International Confer-ence on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention .Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241. [31] F. Xia, A. R. Zamir, Z. He, A. Sax, J. Malik, and S. Savarese, “Gibson env: Real-world perception for embodied agents,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2018, pp. 9068–9079. [32] A. Chang, A. Dai, T. Funkhouser, M. Halber, M. Niessner, M. Savva, S. Song, A. Zeng, and Y. Zhang, “Matterport3d: Learning from rgb-d data in indoor environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06158 , 2017. [33] N. Hirose, F. Xia, R. Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, A. Sadeghian, and S. Savarese, “Deep visual mpc-policy learning for navigation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 3184–3191, 2019. [34] H. Karnan, A. Nair, X. Xiao, G. Warnell, S. Pirk, A. Toshev, J. Hart, J. Biswas, and P. Stone, “Socially compliant navigation dataset (scand): A large-scale dataset of demonstrations for social navigation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 11 807–11 814, 2022. [35] L. Yang, B. Kang, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, J. Feng, and H. Zhao, “Depth anything v2,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 21 875–21 911, 2024. [36] W. Cai, J. Peng, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, M. Wei, H. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Wang, and J. Pang, “Navdp: Learning sim-to-real navigation dif-fusion policy with privileged information guidance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08712 , 2025. [37] M. Zhou, Y. Gu, H. Zheng, L. Song, G. He, Y. Zhang, W. Hu, and Y. Yang, “Score distillation of flow matching models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25127 , 2025.