Title: Active Inference as the Test-Time Scaling Law for Physical AI Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22813v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 03:09:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 53

Markdown Content:
1

# Active Inference as the Test-Time Scaling Law for Physical AI Agents 

Omar Hashash, Member, IEEE, Christo Kurisummoottil Thomas, Senior Member, IEEE, 

Walid Saad, Fellow, IEEE, M´ erouane Debbah, Fellow, IEEE, Karl Friston, and Adeel Razi, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract 

In this paper, a novel test-time scaling law for physical artificial intelligence (AI) agents is intro-duced. This scaling law enables physical AI agents to reason with their world models so as to generalize in unforeseen scenarios that appear at test time. In particular, the derived scaling law is grounded in the first principle of active inference that equips physical AI agents with the general objective to survive 

in the real world under which their specific, narrow task objectives are subsumed. Active inference achieves this by providing the reasoning necessary to resolve the prediction errors that arise when the agent encounters unforeseen situations outside its training distribution, enabling physical AI agents to generalize in new situations that appear in non-stationary environments. The proposed scaling law captures this generalization by dynamically updating the physical AI agent’s policy with this reasoning capability at test time. This policy update is then modeled as a soft Bayesian inference process in which the beliefs about the policy are updated using the reasoning that reduces the prediction errors (i.e., surprise) expected under allowable policies. Notably, the resulting posterior policy admits a biologically plausible interpretation which recovers the scaling mechanism that engages the brain’s basal ganglia and prefrontal cortex at test time. To solve this analytically intractable inference problem, a variational inference solution that minimizes free energy bounds is developed to reduce prediction error, and the proposed framework is further extended to enable learning beyond training by reinforcing new instances, 

O. Hashash and W. Saad are with the Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Institute for Advanced Computing, Virginia Tech, Alexandria, VA, USA. Emails: omarnh@vt.edu, walids@vt.edu. C.K. Thomas is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA, USA. Email: cthomas2@wpi.edu. M. Debbah is with is with Khalifa University of Science and Technology, Abu Dhabi 127788, United Arab Emirates, and also with the CentraleSupelec, University Paris Saclay, 91192 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. E-mail: merouane.debbah@ku.ac.ae. K. Friston is with the Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK. Email: k.friston@ucl.ac.uk A. Razi is with the Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health at School of Psychological Sciences and Monash Biomedical Imaging, Monash University, Clayton, Australia and CIFAR Global Scholars Program, Toronto, Canada and Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK. Email: adeel.razi@monash.edu.      

> arXiv:2606.22813v1 [cs.AI] 22 Jun 2026 2
> resolved at test time, in both the policy and world model. This approach is shown to enable physical AI agents to continuously learn through real-world deployment. Unlike existing scaling laws that remain constrained by factors such as model size and training data, the derived solution ultimately scales with the continuous experience of a physical AI agent in the real world. Simulation results in the context of an autonomous driving task demonstrate that the proposed solution outperforms model-free Q-learning and model-based Bayesian reinforcement learning, by achieving robust generalization to unforeseen scenarios while improving inference efficiency by over 36% .
> Index Terms
> World model, active inference, free energy, surprise, reasoning, planning, test-time scaling law.

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Physical artificial intelligence (AI) agents such as humanoid robots and autonomous vehicles inevitably encounter unforeseen 1 situations when operating in the physical world [1]. This is due to the dynamic, non-stationary nature of the real world and its infinite state space that prevents the agent from fully experiencing it. In consequence, the experience of a physical AI agent about the world remains limited to its training phase. This, in turn, explains why physical AI agents often fail when they experience new, unforeseen scenarios at test time . Recent real-world examples of such failures include the December 2025 Waymo power outage incident in San Francisco, where robotaxis encountered non-functioning traffic lights – an unforeseen scenario that caused multiple vehicles to stop abruptly mid-intersection, forcing Waymo to suspend its service entirely [2]. To resolve the situations that unfold beyond their training domain, physical AI agents must then rely on their reasoning at test time. This reasoning about the world can be facilitated through 

world models which are an essential cognitive component that bring forth an understanding of the physical world in terms of its real-time state, causal structures, and dynamic evolution [3]. Accordingly, reasoning typically leverages world models to simulate counterfactual scenarios and plan future states of the world while optimizing the cost of the actions 2 [5]. Ultimately, the goal of this reasoning is to drive the AI agent to generalize in these new situations. However, while reasoning indeed paves the way for potentially optimizing the actions of the AI agent in 

> 1An unforeseen scenario refers to an unexpected, unanticipated, or unfamiliar state in which the AI system has limited or no prior experience to handle properly.
> 2In the field of psychology, this is also known as System 2 inference [4]. 3

unforeseen scenarios, it does not inherently account for generalization. Such generalization in the physical world would still require merging this reasoning about the world 3 with the narrow task knowledge of the AI agent. In other words, achieving such generalization requires a solution that expands the accumulated experience of the physical AI agent with these reasoning capabilities to optimally handle unforeseen scenarios. If achieved, such a solution can lead to a test-time scaling law for physical AI agents that need to generalize in unforeseen scenarios, analogous to large language model (LLM) agents that must reason to improve their response to harder prompts. 

Therefore, this paper seeks to uncover how reasoning with world models can enable physical AI agents to generalize in unforeseen scenarios, while demonstrating how such a solution, when derived from first principles, can ultimately serve as their test-time scaling law. 

The first step to devise a solution to the physical AI generalization problem is to draw a rigorous analogy with humans who generalize robustly and intuitively in unforeseen scenarios. Humans possess a remarkable ability to detect unforeseen scenarios in the world, which often triggers a natural response known as surprise . In particular, this surprise reflects the mismatch between the world as perceived and its expected state predicted under one’s internal world model [6]. Indeed, humans anticipate their sensory input and any corresponding prediction error 

signals the presence of an unforeseen scenario that deviates from their accumulated experience, prompting them to engage in deliberate reasoning to resolve their surprise. For humans, resolving prediction errors thus implies restoring consistency between predictions under their internal world model and input from the world. Humans typically achieve this by transitioning back to their 

preferred states, from which they can predict prospective transitions and recover their desired sensory input. Clearly, in this situation, reasoning plays a key role in enabling humans to actively 

drive the physical world closer to their preferences. In other words, here, the purpose of reasoning is to take actions that can eliminate the source of surprise, i.e., “the prediction error”. The mechanism that formalizes this key process is called active inference [7], which models human perception as an inference process shaped by such deliberate reasoning and actions. Thus far, the framework of active inference has been used to study how humans detect and reason about unforeseen scenarios through a control of their prediction errors. More broadly, active inference provides a first-principles account of how all living systems must exhibit this form of reasoning to survive in the real world and ensure their existence [8]. Remarkably, the absence of this form 

> 3This is often known as common-sense reasoning. 4Convergence
> (NESS)

Time Steps 

> Rewards

Training  Survival Maintains NESS to   

> preserve the policy &
> world model
> First principles of
> survival
> (active inference)
> Assume stationary
> conditions about
> the environment

Survival is limited  to the 

stationary conditions of 

the training distribution 

Survival in dynamic, 

non -stationary real -

world scenarios 

Proposed Work 

Existing Works 

Test 

Time 

Fig. 1: Illustration of the solutions for survival at test time by conserving the NESS of physical AI agents, according to the different underlying conditions assumed about the world. 

of “biological” reasoning at test time in physical AI agents, to date, might possibly explain their failures and limited capacity to survive in the real world [9]. 

Indeed, the physical world is full of unforeseen scenarios that an AI agent must deal with to survive. By definition, survival then becomes one of the main facets of an AI agent that generalizes in the world. From a physics standpoint, agentic systems that survive by persisting in the world are those that evolve to achieve a non-equilibrium steady state (NESS) with their environment 4 [10]. This is similar to what today’s AI systems (e.g., reinforcement learning (RL)) reach when their policies and world models converge to optimal behavior at the end of their training phase, as shown in Fig. 1. Hence, AI agents must strive to preserve the functionality of these policies and world models to survive at test time . Here, Fig. 1 shows the two ways in which this can happen. Current physical AI solutions such as RL achieve this by assuming stationary conditions about the world at test time. However, these assumptions are often violated 

> 4NESS is defined by two factors. First, the non-equilibrium considers that the agent continues to interact with its environment. Second, the steady state implies that the probability distribution of the states of the agent remains constant over time. 5

in practice due to the uncertain and dynamic nature of the real world 5 [11]. This necessarily renders policies (and world models) sub-optimal, setting up these physical AI systems to fail at test time. However, by considering the alternative approach which equips AI agents with the first principle that ensures survival at test time (i.e., active inference), we can ensure that physical AI agents continue to function even in non-stationary and uncertain environments. This helps meet the requirements of real-world physical environments, where survival cannot be guaranteed by simply relying on stationarity assumptions. In fact, the urge to survive will drive AI agents to generalize in the face of unforeseen scenarios that they encounter. Remarkably, this fundamental solution remains underexplored in the realm of AI, thus making generalization at test time one of the central open challenges in physical AI. A. Prior Works 

Generalizing at test time has motivated a growing body of work and emerging architec-tures [12]–[15] that position reasoning and world models as their key pillars. OpenAI’s GPT-5 [12] employs dynamic routing to selectively invoke chain-of-thought reasoning at test time, improving performance and generalizing when handling complex or unfamiliar tasks. Meta’s V-JEPA 2 [13] constructs a world model through self-supervised video pretraining with minimal robot interac-tion, which enables zero-shot generalization and planning in novel environments without task-specific rewards. In [14], a vision-language model is coupled with a world model that enables reasoning over imagined egocentric views for generalizing to unforeseen spatial queries without fine-tuning. Physical Intelligence’s π0.7 [15] extends this further to physical AI by conditioning a generalist vision-language-action model on sub-goal images generated by a world model, thereby allowing it to reason over enriched visual context before predicting its actions to generalize across unseen environments and tasks in a compositional manner. Despite the significant improvement in generalization, the approaches in [12]–[15] remain limited from complementary viewpoints. While GPT-5’s dynamic router bears a conceptual resemblance to a prediction error signal, i.e., selectively triggering additional reasoning when a query exceeds the LLM’s ability, it lacks a grounded, embodied world model from which such a signal can be derived in a principled manner. This distinction is crucial, because a test-time 

scaling law must emerge from first principles of intelligent behavior , rather than from a learned 

> 5These assumptions are meaningfully valid if the environment stays the same as in closed-world scenarios (e.g., chess). 6

routing heuristic. Although V-JEPA 2 [13] (and its extensions [16]) generalizes across unseen environments and objects, it relies on costly deliberative planning to reason through each step before acting, at the expense of efficiency in policy execution in performing tasks. This is in contrast to GPT-5 which switches between efficient execution and deliberative reasoning modes. In both [14] and [15], reasoning is mediated through language , with the world model serving merely as a downstream visual generator, rather than as the substrate through which the agent directly reasons about world states and plans action consequences. Such reasoning is constrained to the statistical patterns in the training data that works for compositional generalization, but falls short in driving physical AI agents such as π0.7 to truly generalize in the world. This is evident as 

π0.7 successfully generalizes to novel task combinations that can be decomposed from tasks seen during training, while failing when faced with scenarios outside its training domain. To resolve these new situations at test time, π0.7 resorts to additional human-provided reasoning to fill in the missing gap. This limitation clearly highlights the need for the mechanism that autonomously generates this reasoning about its actions (i.e., via a world model) when confronting truly unforeseen scenarios. Furthermore, none of these approaches [12]–[15] addresses the continual adaptation of the policy and world model over time, leaving the AI agent unable to incorporate new experiences that it generalizes to at test time. From the limitations of [12] and [13], it becomes clear that there is a need for a principled method that detects prediction errors at test time to trigger the transition from efficient policy execution to deliberative reasoning. Addressing this gap defines the first step toward designing a physical AI agent that can truly generalize in unforeseen scenarios. Unlike [14] and [15], reasoning with the world model must aim to optimize the agent’s actions in response to the prediction error, instead of providing additional visual input. While active inference provides a solution for detecting such prediction errors and reasoning about how to resolve them, it is still necessary to design a first-principle scaling mechanism that enables the AI agent to update its policy with this reasoning at test time. From a biomimetic perspective in which both RL and active inference engage dopaminergic signaling in the brain 6, revisiting the neuronal basis of reasoning and planning offers a natural grounding for a rigorous test-time scaling law. 

> 6A dopaminergic signaling system encompasses a neuromodulatory mechanism in which dopamine encodes reward prediction errors and broadcasts them to regulate synaptic plasticity and action selection throughout the brain. This signaling is exploited in both RL and active inference. 7

This intersection between learning and inference further motivates the development of a unified framework that blends both training and test time paradigms and can serve as a bedrock for physical AI agents that need to continuously reason, generalize, and learn in the physical world. B. Contributions 

The main contribution of this paper is a novel test-time scaling law for physical AI agents 

grounded in active inference . This scaling law considers how physical AI agents reason with their world models to resolve the prediction errors that arise in unforeseen scenarios. This, in turn, drives AI agents to dynamically scale their policies with this reasoning to generalize at test time . Inspired by the fact that every living system evinces this reasoning capability to ensure its survival [17], our test-time scaling law identifies the minimum amount of generalization that any physical AI agent must exhibit to successfully achieve their narrow task objectives in the real world. Ultimately, this provides a solution to the profound challenge facing physical AI (e.g., RL) agents that fail to achieve their objectives in non-stationary environments. Furthermore, the proposed solution naturally extends the learning framework beyond training by incorporating their new experience at test time . As such, the proposed approach enables the AI agents to 

reinforce the new instances encountered and resolved at test time, as they update their policy and world model to reduce prediction errors that would otherwise result from similar instances in the future. Thereby, the derived scaling law relaxes the stationary assumptions that limit RL at test time, enabling agents to incorporate new knowledge and accumulate experience continuously through interaction with the world. In summary, our key contributions include:  

> •

Starting from active inference as the first-principles account of self-organization in open systems, we derive a test-time scaling law for physical AI agents. This scaling law verifies and grounds the empirical test-time scaling observed in LLMs (e.g., GPT-5), while extending it to embodied physical AI agents operating in non-stationary environments (see Fig. 2). This verifies that it is policies that naturally scale with reasoning at test time and LLMs scale as a simplified, specific case of the original solution. The derived scaling law posits survival 

as the universal objective common to all intelligent agents, under which their narrow task objectives are subsumed and governed in the real world. This transforms physical AI agents into dual-objective systems that aim to maximize a general survival reward formalized by a prediction error through active inference and a narrow task reward (e.g., driving, walking, etc.) instilled through techniques such as RL. 8 

> •

By associating the dopaminergic signaling of RL with its role in active inference, we provide the first computational model that bridges the role of dopamine during training [18] to its role at test time within a single mathematical formulation . We find that, after convergence of the policy during training (where dopamine converges to its baseline), dopamine spikes again at test time when prediction errors arise in non-stationary environments to initiate the transition from policy execution to reasoning. Neurobiologically, this reasoning is instanti-ated by neural signals from the pre-frontal cortex (PFC) to the basal ganglia (BG) which speaks to how the value function of the policy is modulated with reasoning in response to prediction errors at test time. This modulation provides the missing test-time scaling mechanism of the policy, that can be mathematically translated into a soft Bayesian belief update with the virtual evidence acquired via reasoning to provide the posterior scaled policy . Remarkably, this Bayesian update decomposes action policies into feed-forward and inference terms, where the feed-forward term recovers the original RL policy and the inference term, which is lacking in existing solutions like [12]–[15] , provides the missing modulation that the AI agent needs to swiftly adapt its policy when prediction errors arise in non-stationary environments.  

> •

As the inference problem underlying the resolution of prediction errors and policy scaling is intractable, we resort to a variational inference solution that introduces the notions of 

variational free energy (VFE) and expected free energy (EFE) as variational objectives that must be minimized to resolve prediction errors. Modeling the resolution of prediction errors as a gradient descent on the free energy landscape naturally gives the scaled policy as the solution that simultaneously satisfies both the general survival objective and the narrow task objective, enabling the agent to generalize to unforeseen scenarios at test time.  

> •

To reduce future prediction errors, as a means to increase chances of survival, the agent must update its world model to anticipate the resolved , unforeseen scenarios. We model this learning process as a Bayesian belief update that reinforces the new experiences accu-mulated at test time into both the policy and world model. This enables physical AI agents to continuously learn from their own experience and autonomously self improve through real-world deployment , revealing that learning and inference form a continuum driven by prediction errors. Unlike LLMs that mainly rely on scaling their parameters and training data to improve performance, our proposed solution scales with the experience of the agent directly through continuous interaction with the world , transcending the limits of scaling 9…

BG 

> Prediction error
> No prediction
> error
> State
> (input)
> Feed -forward
> Reasoning
> Scaling

PFC 𝜋       

> •Learning
> •Reasoning
> •Planning
> •World Model
> (PFC)
> (BG)
> Policy Perception Planning

# Test -Time Scaling Law for Physical AI 

# Test -Time Scaling Law for LLMs 

> Query
> (input)
> GPT -5-thinking
> GPT -5-main

# …

# …  

> Output reasoning
> tokens directly

# …Output tokens         

> Router
> Chain -of -thought
> reasoning
> Fast response
> •Empirical scaling law
> •Heuristic trigger (i.e., router)
> •No objective (s)
> •Static environments (e.g., coding,
> mathematics, etc.)
> •No continual learning

Simplified, special case            

> •Scaling derived from first principles
> •Natural trigger grounded in
> cognition (i.e., prediction error)
> •General survival objective
> •Non -stationary environments
> •Continual learning
> Language  Physical World

Full, original solution 

Fig. 2: Test-time scaling law for physical AI agents (top) vs. test-time scaling law in LLMs (bottom). The proposed framework grounds test-time scaling in active inference, where prediction errors trigger the transition from BG execution to PFC reasoning, followed by a feedback to scale the policy in the BG. Here, the LLM’s (e.g., GPT-5) routing and scaling represent a special empirical case of the proposed framework. 

laws that are constrained by data and parameters [19]–[21]. 

• Simulation results for an autonomous driving task demonstrate robust generalization to unforeseen scenarios while improving inference efficiency by more than 36 % compared with model-free Q-learning and model-based Bayesian RL. 

C. Key Insights 

The key findings from our derived scaling law demonstrate that the restrictive stationarity assumption underlying RL can be relaxed at test time, provided that agents are equipped with the reasoning necessary to eliminate prediction errors. This is possible because the prediction errors associated with the general survival reward operate alongside the narrow task reward throughout training, and, yet, in the existing state of art, they remain unaccounted for at test time. This implies that prediction errors were implicitly being minimized while trying to maximize the narrow task reward during training. Particularly, when an AI agent thus fails in a non-stationary environment, it is effectively losing control of its general survival reward which exposes the agent 10 

to existential risk, before degrading its narrow task performance. In other words, maximizing long-term reward in conventional RL was implicitly tied to survival, and that restoring the general reward through active inference, at test time, as proposed in this paper, addresses a limitation that has been largely ignored in real-world deployments of physical AI solutions. Our approach unifies RL and active inference as manifestations of the same principle at different levels, where RL implicitly minimizes prediction errors within the training distribution of the narrow task objective and active inference makes this minimization explicit when the training distribution is violated (e.g., through a distribution shift [22]) at test time. Intuitively, the derived solution leverages the efficiency of RL and the context-sensitivity of active inference by integrating both within the same framework. In other words, agents learn a world model (and policy) under the assumption there exists a single-state action policy. From the perspective of active inference, this is a process of habit-learning; namely, “this is what I do, given this state of the world”. However, when the context switches from training to test time, one can now engage active inference to evaluate alternative policies when, and only when, there is evidence that the context has changed . This evidence is gathered by observing an increase in surprise (i.e., prediction error), and it can also be used to weight subsequent updates to the state-action policy (encoded in Q for instance). We can also view this as a form of Bayesian model averaging but applied to RL (e.g., Q-learning). In short, if there is no surprise, then there is no evidence that the context has changed and there is no policy update. 

D. Organization 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the system design and proposed active inference framework that allows establishing the test time scaling law for physical AI. Section III provides a variational inference solution that transforms the intractable inference which captures perception into a VFE minimization problem. Section IV transforms the intractable inference problems of planning and action into an EFE minimization problem. Section V shows how updating the world model (and policy) by learning the unforeseen scenarios, when done at test time, can be modeled as an inference problem that reinforces the new experiences. Section VI presents the simulation results and analysis for an autonomous driving task with an unforeseen jaywalking scenario encountered at test time. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. 11 

II. T EST -T IME SCALING LAW FOR PHYSICAL AI A GENTS : P ROPOSED SYSTEM DESIGN AND ACTIVE INFERENCE FRAMEWORK 

Consider a geographical zone representing a region of the real world, as shown in Fig. 3. This zone comprises autonomous physical AI agents and a wireless network infrastructure that provides connectivity and computing services for these agents 7. In particular, the wireless network base station (BS) is equipped with an edge computing server to provide world model services for the physical AI agents in this zone. This world model enables the AI agent to detect prediction errors that signal an unforeseen scenario and counterfactually reason about the consequences of its actions to resolve these errors. In other words, the AI agents offload their reasoning process to the network’s edge server. To enable this process, each AI agent will have digital twins (DTs) alongside the world model at the network edge, that are used to model the alternative policies that a physical AI agent may undertake. Unlike conventional DTs that serve as a simulation and replication tool, the goal of DTs in our framework is to operate the world model at the network edge and return a real-time reasoning feedback to the physical AI agent, i.e., physical twin (PT), to scale its policy at test time and generalize in an unforeseen scenario [23]. For example and without loss of generality, the physical AI agent in our framework could be an autonomous vehicle that has been trained via RL to execute real-time driving decisions 8,as illustrated in Fig. 3. This agent follows a stochastic policy πo(a | s), which specifies a distribution over driving actions a ∈ A conditioned on world states s ∈ S . As the AI agent may encounter unforeseen scenarios while navigating the world (e.g., a jaywalking pedestrian crossing the road on a green traffic light), it is crucial that the network leverages its DTs and provides the agent with the necessary reasoning capabilities to deal with such situations. This reasoning is shared from the network to the AI agent through a set of configurations u ∈ U 

that encode the general reward stemming from the actions that favor survival, along with the prediction error. The agent can then leverage these configurations to update its policy from πo to 

> 7The proposed system can consider various alternative designs. Here, we assumed that a wireless network, equipped with sufficient resources (e.g., compute, throughput, latency, etc.) is available to service the world model needs of the agents. The implementation challenges and details of such an architecture are discussed in our prior work [1]. Alternatively, one can also deploy the world model directly on the agent without the use of a wireless network. The proposed active inference framework and generalization approach, as well as our results, are independent of this design choice.
> 8Although the physical AI agent in this work is considered to be an autonomous vehicle for illustration purposes, this framework generally applies to any other real-world agent (e.g., robot, drone, etc.) as well. 12

π′ 

> o

through a test-time scaling mechanism. Thereby, the agent will now choose its action from the scaled policy π′ 

> o

which generalizes the agent’s experience in the unforeseen scenario appearing at test time instant t.As shown in Fig. 3, the physical AI agent interacts with a set N of N physical assets available in the world. Examples of these assets may include elements such as the pedestrians, vehicles, and traffic lights, that comprise the physical world. In contrast to the AI agent that receives reasoning feedback through its DTs to scale its policy, these physical assets take part in the world model without incurring any feedback to their physical counterparts. This is evidently because only physical AI agents are the intelligent systems that may require test-time reasoning to generalize in unforeseen scenarios. To initiate this test-time scaling, the first step is to build the world model over the network, which we explain next. 

A. World Model 

The world model over the network captures the interactions between all the elements (i.e., AI agent and physical assets) in the considered geographical zone. Henceforth, these interacting elements compose an environment whose components are causally dependent at a given time index τ ∈ {1, . . . , T }, where T is the total number of time instances [24]. These causal dependencies among the states of the elements can be represented in the form of a structured prior, as follows: 

p(sτ ) = p(s0 

> τ

)p(s1 

> τ

| s0 

> τ

)p(s2 

> τ

| s0 

> τ

, s 1 

> τ

) . . . p (sNτ | s0 

> τ

, . . . , s N −1 

> τ

) = p(s0 

> τ

)

> N

Y

> n=1

p(snτ | s0 

> τ

, . . . , s n−1 

> τ

),

(1) where sτ ≜ (s0 

> τ

, s 1 

> τ

, . . . , s Nτ ), with s0 

> τ

being the state of the PT at time τ , and snτ ∀n ∈ N being the state of each physical asset n at time τ .Furthermore, the network captures the state of the world sτ through sensory observations oτ ≜

(o0 

> τ

, o 1 

> τ

, . . . , o Nτ ) ∈ O about the real-world elements. Here, o0 

> τ

is the sensory observation from the PT at time τ and onτ , ∀n ∈ N is the sensory observation from each physical asset n at time τ .Accordingly, each state snτ generates a corresponding sensing observation onτ ∀n ∈ N . In general, sensing observations can be captured through different wireless sensing technologies such as Internet of Things (IoT) sensors. Here, these sensory observations from different elements are conditionally independent when conditioned on their states. Accordingly, this yields a likelihood function that factorizes as: p(oτ | sτ ) = QNi=0 p(oiτ | siτ ).13 Sensing 

Observations      

> 𝑜 𝑡 =(𝑜 𝑡
> 0,𝑜 𝑡
> 1,𝑜 𝑡
> 2,…,𝑜 𝑡
> 𝑁 )

Planning 

Wireless Sensing 

(e.g., IoT)  World 

Model 

Perception    

> Physical
> Asset 𝟐
> Physical
> Asset 𝟏
> Physical
> Asset 𝒏

𝑜 𝑡 

# …

𝑠 𝑡 

# …

𝜋 

# …

BS 

> Edge
> Network

𝑠 𝑡    

> 𝑝 (𝑜 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡 )
> 𝑝 (𝑠 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡 −1,𝜋 )

𝑠 𝑇  

> Surprise
> Top -down mapping from
> predicted states to sensory
> observations Counterfactual reasoning
> to minimize surprise

Action 

> Proactive configurations to
> update the policy of the physical
> AI agent and generalize in
> unforeseen scenarios
> PT
> Asset sDT s
> DT s
> Alternative
> policies

Fig. 3: Illustration of our test-time scaling framework comprising a physical AI agent (e.g., an autonomous vehicle) that reasons through the world model at the wireless network edge to generalize in unforeseen scenarios. 

As the world evolves according to the causal structure of the environment, the states of the elements at time τ are causally dependent on their states in the previous time instant τ − 1

and the corresponding courses of actions of the AI agent, stemming from its policy, that can represented as π = ( a1, . . . , a T ). Accordingly, we can now define the world model that captures the temporal and causal dependencies. 

Definition 1. The generative world model W over the states and observations of the real-world elements is defined as: 

W(o1: T , s 1: T , π ) := p(o1: T , s 1: T , π ) = p(π)p(s1)

TY

τ =2 

p(sτ | sτ −1, π )

TY

τ =1 

p(oτ | sτ ) (2) The world model W in (2) is a (forward) generative model that factorizes the joint distribution over observations o1: T , states s1: T , and actions π into three components. The first captures the prior over the agent’s policy p(π) and the initial state distribution p(s1), the second describes the causal state transition dynamics p(sτ |sτ −1, π ) which encode how the world evolves over time as a consequence of the AI agent’s actions, and the third describes the observation model 

p(oτ |sτ ) which captures how the network perceives the resulting world states through its sensors. 14 

The factorization in (2) encodes the full causal structure of the agent’s interaction with the environment, enabling it to predict future observations and plan actions accordingly. After acquiring this world model, the network can now provide the AI agent with the reasoning capabilities necessary to deal with unforeseen scenarios. Initially, the sensory input received in an unforeseen scenario violates the sensory observations predicted by the world model over the network. This initiates a prediction error or mismatch called surprise [25], [26]. This formal notion of surprise (a.k.a., surprisal or self-information) signals the level to which the current state of the world is unpredictable under the world model W for which the AI agent (i.e., policy 

πo) exists. In particular, the surprise under W at time τ is defined by the network with respect to its received sensory observations as follows [26]: 

S (τ, π o) = − ln p(oτ | πo) = − ln X

> sτ

p(oτ , s τ | πo) = − ln X

> sτ

p(oτ | sτ )p(sτ | πo).

In essence, once S (t, π o) exceeds a surprise threshold 9 ϵ, the situation is considered to be unforeseen, for which relying on πo by itself will not be able to generate the optimal action. In other words, an unforeseen scenario is one in which the agent’s accumulated experience encoded in πo is insufficient to predict and respond to the current state of the world, which renders the policy πo sub-optimal and requires deliberative reasoning to re-evaluate options. The goal of this reasoning under the world model is to control surprise and reduce it back below the threshold ϵ. To achieve this, it is necessary that the network starts by perceiving the world after its predictions of this world have been violated 10 . Then, the network engages in planning 

to evaluate the actions that may reduce future (expected) surprise. By using active inference ,we precisely model these perception and planning functions as Bayesian inference processes. Hence, we need to extend the inference process to model the test-time scaling of the policy from πo to π′

> o

. The agent then acts according to the policy π′ 

> o

in order to resolve the uncertainty induced by an unforeseen scenario. Next, we explain how perception, planning, and action can be modeled through Bayesian inference.  

> 9In general, the surprise threshold is an adaptive parameter. However, it is considered to be a fixed parameter in the scope of this work for simplicity.
> 10 For simplicity, we limit perception to the case in which prediction errors exceed the threshold. However, it is essential to clarify that perception is always performed in biological systems even in the absence of prediction errors. In other words, perception (as perceptual inference) is neglected when prediction errors remain below the threshold ϵ.15

B. Perception, Planning, and Action as Inference Perception entails aligning the world model with the current state of the world. This is equivalent to acquiring an accurate estimate of the state of the world at time t over the network. This estimate can be conceptualized as the process of inferring the most likely hidden states causing the sensory input received by the network [7]. In particular, this can be modeled as an inference process which considers integrating prior expectations about the expected states of the world with real-time sensory data observations to infer the current state of the world [27]. In other words, the network updates its beliefs about the states of the world according to the sequence of sensory observations o1: t received from the real world. The goal of this inference is to ensure the fit between the world model W and the current state of the world at time t. The optimal posterior beliefs about these states are given by Bayes rule: 

p(s1: T , π o | o1: t) = p(s1: T , o 1: t, π o)

p(o1: t) = p(o1: t | s1: T , π o)p(s1: T , π o)

p(o1: t) . (3) Here, the agent’s policy πo is explicitly included in (3) not as a latent variable to be inferred, but as a fixed conditioning variable that specifies the actions taken under the world model, allowing the posterior to evaluate how well the world model’s predictions, under πo, align with the actual observations. Upon perceiving the current state of the world at time t, the agent then exploits its DTs at the network edge to plan the consequences of alternative action sequences π ∈ Π through the world model. This planning entails the simulation of future trajectories which allow the physical AI agent to counterfactually reason which actions best resolve prediction error in this unforeseen scenario. For instance, in Fig. 4, we show an unforeseen jaywalking scenario in which a pedestrian crosses the street at a green light in front of the AI agent (an autonomous vehicle). During this scenario, the prediction error increases because this unforeseen scenario was not observed during training. One way to reduce the prediction error in this scenario is by directing the AI agent to avoid collision with the pedestrian. In fact, this implies that the AI agent must realize certain preferences that minimize its expected surprise over its future trajectory τ > t .Technically, this is a path-integral of a surprisal, which essentially maps to seeking the path of least action [28]. Preferred states of the world are those that the agent will likely tend to occupy, which combine two streams: (i) states that preserve the integrity of the AI agent (e.g., protecting humans, avoid crashing, etc.) and, (ii) situations reinforced by experience to become familiar under πo (i.e., preferences that the world admits or allows). Since W assigns higher 16 

likelihood to preferred states, steering the AI agent towards these states naturally reduces the mismatch between predicted and actual observations, thereby minimizing surprise [29]. Hence, it is essential to evaluate the surprise resulting from these alternative trajectories or paths at future time instants τ > t . Thus, the surprise anticipated over each planned trajectory π will be: 

S (π) = 

> T

X 

> τ=t+1

S (τ, π ) = −

> T

X 

> τ=t+1

Ep(oτ |π) ln 

"X

> sτ

p(oτ , s τ | π)

#

=

> T

X 

> τ=t+1

H [p(oτ | π)] , (4) where H[·] is the entropy function, which captures the expected surprise. This reasoning about expected surprise must then be leveraged by the AI agent to return to its preferred states of the world. This restores states of the world whereby πo becomes once again the optimal policy 11 . To drive the AI agent to take the actions that push it towards its preferred states, it is necessary to evaluate the level to which each action of the AI agent can reduce surprise. This can be captured through the surprise per action-value , defined as: 

QS (a, s t) = X

> π∈Π

δ(a, π (t)) S (π) ∀a ∈ A , (5) where δ(·) is the Kronecker delta function. The value in (5) represents the accumulated surprise (i.e., prediction error) resulting from taking action a in state st. Thus, QS (a, s t) reflects the reward attributed to achieving the general survival objective. For the AI agent to update its policy πo with reasoning, the network shares a feedback ut = [ γ, Q S (a1, s t), . . . , Q S (a|A| , s t)] 

that transmits the parameters behind this reasoning to the AI agent. Here, γ ∈ [0 , +∞) is a policy precision parameter that reflects the neuro-modulatory mechanisms that determine the confidence of the network in the planning process and |A| is the cardinality of A. Now, the AI agent can interpret this feedback as additional evidence generated by reasoning, thinking, or even imagination about the world to update its beliefs about its base policy πo. To see how this inference process scales the policy at test time, we next explain the biological process by which the brain updates the policy with such reasoning. This subsequent discussion will allow us to ground the belief update of the policy in a neuromimetic manner. In training an AI agent using techniques such as RL, dopamine initially settles at its baseline level as a given policy converges, thereby allowing the agent to operate in feed-forward mode with its base policy. In an unforeseen scenario, dopamine spikes again due to prediction errors that violate predictions under the agent’s learned world model. This spike signals shifts control 

> 11 This offers a first-principles explanation for Kahneman’s observation that System 1 naturally dominates System 2 [4].

17 • Surprise detected when                    

> pedestrian attempts to cross
> with green traffic light
> •Prediction error resolved
> as pedestrian passes
> •Back to passive perception
> 𝜋 𝑜
> ′
> 𝜋 𝑜
> Action a
> •Test -time scaling with
> configurations (e.g., action
> can be to decrease velocity
> to avoid accident)
> •Switch to active inference over
> the network
> •Network engages in reasoning
> to minimize surprise through
> its DT sand world model
> •No prediction error (i.e.,
> passive perception )
> ≥𝜖
> Inference
> <𝜖

𝜋 𝑜 

𝒖 𝑡 

> Reasoning
> 𝜖
> 𝜋 0
> 𝜋 1

Fig. 4: Illustration of the test-time scaling mechanism in which the AI agent must generalize in an unforeseen scenario that considers a jaywalking pedestrian appearing at test time. 

from the BG which governs policy execution to the PFC that initiates deliberative reasoning. In particular, the PFC responds by transitioning to active inference which includes planning (as inference) that generates counterfactual simulations of imagined action trajectories evaluated through alternative policies. The PFC then transmits the resulting reasoning signal back to the BG to modulate the value function of the policy in proportion to the prediction error. Conceptually, this is similar to the reasoning feedback from the wireless network to the AI agent. Henceforth, this modulation captures the test-time scaling mechanism for physical AI agents which updates their policy πo(a|st) into π′

o(a|st) .

= p(a | ot+1 , s t) that generalizes to the unforeseen scenario. Effectively, this test-time scaling translates into an update of beliefs about the policy with counterfactual evidence from reasoning which can be formulated as a Bayesian inference process 12 . Unlike perception that admits inference based on sensory observations o1: t,policy scaling relies on counterfactual observations ot+1: T ; namely, evidence generated from the 

> 12

The term inference is used in two distinct senses throughout this paper. The first is psychological, referring to the deliberative reasoning of System 2 as opposed to the habitual execution of System 1, following Kahneman’s dual-process theory [4]. The second is mathematical, referring to Bayesian inference as the process of updating beliefs to minimize prediction error, which is the computational mechanism underlying active inference. 18 

world model W through imagined action trajectories π. An inference with such counterfactual evidence yields a soft Bayesian belief update through Pearl’s method of virtual evidence [30] (also known as Jeffrey’s rule [31]). This, in turn, gives rise to posterior scaled policy of the 

test-time scaling law that is established next. 

Theorem 1 (Test-Time Scaling Law) . The test-time scaling mechanism that scales policy πo(a|st)

to π′

> o

(a|st) with inference about the actions that are likely to minimize prediction error (i.e., surprise) is given by: 

π′

> o

(a | st)

| {z }

> posterior

∝ πo(a | st)

| {z }

> prior

p(ot+1: T | π)

| {z }

> likelihood

= [ πo(a | st)] 1−θπo(a | st) exp   − γQ S (a, s t) θ

| {z }

> soft Bayesian update

= πo(a | st)

| {z }

> feed −forward

exp   − γθQ S (a, s t)| {z }

> inference

, (6) where θ ∈ [0 , 1] is the normalized surprise that bounds S (t, π o) in the unit interval (this parameter will be mathematically defined in Section IV) to control the scaling of the base policy. The novel, fundamental insight that we can draw from the test-time scaling in (6) stems from probabilistic inference. In particular, the exp ( −γQ S (a, s t)) term transforms the value function of the actions into likelihood probabilities, analogous to the Boltzmann distribution. Since planning aims to minimize the anticipated surprise S (π), which accumulates as a path integral of entropies over future trajectories as defined in (4), the likelihood of future observations under a planned trajectory is naturally modeled as an exponential distribution 13 . Clearly, when the world is mostly predictable, the surprise S (t, π o) ≈ 0 =⇒ θ ≈ 0. In this case, the inference term in (6) vanishes. Consequently, this reaffirms that action selection reduces into feed-forward control without deliberative thinking (i.e., reasoning). Importantly, the policies in today’s standard RL formulations remain limited to this case where expected surprise is ignored due to stationary assumptions [32]–[34], which is clearly a special case of the equation in (6) .

Remark 1. It is useful to clarify that the final form of (6) resembles Boltzmann policies commonly encountered in RL where action probabilities are proportional to action-value exp( Q(s, a )) [32], 

> 13 This choice is the maximum entropy distribution subject to a constraint on the expected sum of entropies, and therefore makes the fewest assumptions beyond what the planning objective already prescribes. 19

as well as to energy-based models of the form p(x) ∝ exp( −E(x)) [35]. However, the derivation and interpretation here are fundamentally distinct. First, the update arises naturally as a soft Bayesian posterior update through Pearl’s virtual evidence method, where the exponential scaling is the virtual evidence likelihood rather than a hand-crafted energy function. Second, the update is multiplicative over the prior policy πo(a|s), reflecting belief refinement rather than a from-scratch softmax over actions. Third, QS (a, s t) is not a static action-value estimate but a surprise per action value function that aggregates the expected surprise cost of taking action a in state st

at test time. This makes the effective precision (i.e., inverse temperature) γθ a dynamic, surprise-modulated quantity rather than a fixed hyperparameter. The similarity to Boltzmann formulations is therefore a consequence of the underlying Bayesian geometry, and not an assumption imported from the energy-based modeling literature. 

Indeed, one could argue that the absence of the test-time scaling mechanism in (6) has prevented today’s physical AI agents from generalizing in unforeseen scenarios. Evidently, initiating this scaling operation first requires performing the necessary perception and planning processes. Nevertheless, this can be challenging as calculating the model evidence p(o1: t) in (3) for perception can be computationally intractable in practice. This is due to the fact that calculating this distribution requires marginalizing over all the possible states, which can be infeasible given the large number of states in complex models of the world. Similarly, calculating the future surprise while planning includes summations over the set of states and observations that can be analytically intractable. This, in turn, limits the scaling of the policies and their generalization at test time. To address this challenge, one can call on variational Bayes that furnishes tractable solutions for perception and planning. This introduces free energy as an upper bound on surprise, which can be directly optimized to converge on the posterior while eliding marginalization. Here, a key observation is that both perception and planning share the same underlying goal. On the one hand, perception aims to infer the best explanation behind the sensory observations. Equivalently, perception in (3) amounts to maximizing model evidence for τ = t. On the other hand, planning aims to find the action sequence that minimizes the future surprise for τ > t . Clearly, minimizing surprise is equivalent to maximizing model evidence under the preferred world model W. Thus, perception and planning coincide in the context of model evidence maximization. As such, combining both operations under this single objective allows formulating the inference problem 20 Solution Roadmap: 

# Variational Inference 

Perception 

Planning 

Action 

Learning                    

> •Minimizing variational free energy (VFE) to perceive current state
> •VFE as an upper bound to estimate surprise
> •Minimizing expected free energy (EFE) starting from inferred state
> •Infer policy for actions that minimize surprise
> •Markov Blanket as a statistical boundary
> •Policy scaling modeled as gradient descent
> •Updating world model and
> policy via VFE minimization
> Section III
> Section IV
> Section IV
> Section V

Fig. 5: The roadmap for the proposed variational inference solution that unifies perception, planning, action, and learning to enable the test-time scaling framework for the physical AI agent. 

in terms of free energy minimization that essentially serves as a bound on (log) model evidence or surprisal. Intuitively, action and learning should further follow this free energy formulation as they can be modeled in terms of inference. Next, we will describe the (variational) active inference solution summarized in Fig. 5 that unifies perception, planning, action selection, and learning under a single objective of free energy minimization .III. P ERCEPTION AS INFERENCE : M INIMIZING VARIATIONAL FREE ENERGY 

In this section, we adopt a variational Bayesian inference framework [36] to obtain a tractable solution for perception and surprise estimation. This requires introducing a variational distribution to approximate the posterior over states in (3). In particular, an approximation to the true posterior is obtained by minimizing the VFE via variational inference, which simultaneously provides an upper bound on surprise. Thus, by building on this formulation, we cast this inference problem as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP). To solve this POMDP and render inference computationally feasible, we then employ a mean-field approximation [37]. This allows adopting variational message passing (VMP) [38] as an efficient graphical and algorithmic scheme for solving the resulting POMDP and determining the corresponding surprise. 21 

First, we introduce a variational distribution q(s1: T , π o) to approximate the true posterior 

p(s1: T , π o | o1: t) in (3). This approximation is captured by the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the variational distribution and the true posterior: DKL 

q(s1: T , π o)∥ p(s1: T , π o | o1: t).This divergence is then minimized through the VFE functional F [q(s1: T , π o)] (also known as the negative evidence lower bound (ELBO) in variational inference [39]), defined next. 

Definition 2. The VFE is defined as the divergence between the variational distribution q(s1: T , π o)

and generative world model W(s1: T , o 1: t, π o):

F [q(s1: T , π o)] = DKL 

q(s1: T , π o) ∥ p(s1: T , o 1: t, π o)

= Eq(s1: T ,π o)[ln q(s1: T , π o) − ln p(s1: T , o 1: t, π o)] = DKL 

q(s1: T , π o) ∥ p(s1: T , π o) − Eq(s1: T ,π o)[ln p(o1: t | s1: T , π o)] .

Based on Definition 2, we can show that the VFE admits a tractable solution to approximate surprise. 

Lemma 1. The VFE provides an upper bound on surprise (or lower bound on model evidence), i.e., S (t, π o) ≤ F [q(s1: T , π o)] .

Proof: See Appendix A. 

From Definition 2 and Lemma 1, we observe that by varying q(s1: T , π o) to minimize the VFE, it is possible to approximate p(s1: T , π o | o1: t), while simultaneously approaching an accurate estimate for S (t, π o). This means that the network initially perceives the physical world as it captures surprise. If surprise exceeds the threshold ϵ, the network engages in deliberative reasoning, whereby it plans alternative policies π ∈ Π that can minimize the surprise over future time instances to scale the policy πo of the AI agent. Otherwise, the network moves forward by just considering the policy πo. This sequential inference process can be naturally formulated as a POMDP [40]. This is due to the fact that the network can only perceive the current state of its world (i.e., AI agent and assets) through sensory observations and must infer the causes behind these observations to update its beliefs about the state of the world. Accordingly, the network must act under uncertainty about the hidden states that generate sensory observations. In contrast to RL, which exclusively aims to maximize its long-term task reward, this active inference framework subsumes the task reward while ensuring survival by minimizing the VFE 22 =

𝜋 

# …

## 𝑨 

## 𝑩 𝑩 

> 𝑠 𝑡 −1
> 𝑜 𝑡

## 𝑨 

> 𝑜 𝑡 −1

=

# …

> 𝑠 𝑡

=

## 𝑨 

## 𝑩 

> 𝑜 𝑡 +1
> 𝑠 𝑡 +1

# …

# …

# …

=

## 𝑨 

> 𝑜 𝑇
> 𝑠 𝑇

Fig. 6: Forney-style factor graph representing the generative model of the POMDP. 

as an upper bound on prediction errors. We thus define a POMDP to model this problem, with the following key components:  

> •

Agent: The network is the agent that performs inference and reasoning on behalf of the physical AI agent in the real world. In other words, the AI agent offloads its reasoning process onto the network edge.  

> •

Observations: At each time step τ , the network receives sensory observations oτ ∈ O from the real world.  

> •

States: The network infers the state of the real world sτ ∈ S at time instant τ from its sensory observations oτ through perception.  

> •

Observation model : The likelihood function A that maps the sensory observations oτ ∈ O 

into the states sτ ∈ S , with its entries parametrized as p(oτ | sτ ). 

> •

Dynamics (transition) model: The evolution of hidden states is governed by the transition model Bπ,τ with its entries parameterized as p(sτ | sτ −1, π ) ∀sτ ∈ S , where the actions 

aτ ∈ A performed by the network at time τ come from the policies defined as the sequences of future actions π ∈ Π. 

> •

Actions: The network shares a feedback configuration uτ ∈ U to scale the policy of the AI agent in case of surprise. Otherwise, no feedback is shared in the absence of surprise. To solve this POMDP with approximate inference, we adopt a VMP scheme that can efficiently 23 

approximate the true posteriors by minimizing the VFE. This is illustrated in Fig. 6 by leveraging a Forney-style factor graph representation [41] of the generative world model W(s1: T , o 1: t, π )

defined in (2). In particular, approximate Bayesian inference is implemented through the prop-agation of messages between neighboring nodes, that correspond to the local updates of their sufficient statistics. Effectively, VMP provides efficient, distributed, and biologically inspired inference updates, as elucidated next. To derive the variational inference updates, we minimize the VFE in (2) with respect to 

q(s1: T , π o). To ensure tractability of this approximation, the variational distribution q(s1: T , π o) is typically assumed to factorize under a mean-field approximation into the product of independent distributions, such that: q(s1: T , π o) ≈ q(πo)

> T

Y 

> τ=1

q(sτ | πo). (7) The approximation in (7) assumes that states of the world conditioned on the base policy q(sτ | πo)

∀τ ∈ { 1, . . . , T } are independent across time. As perception is concerned with the estimation of states q(s1: T ), we can consider q(πo) as a constant term and safely neglect it during this belief update. Thus, we can rewrite the VFE in Definition 2 to isolate q(sτ | πo) as follows: 

F [q(s1: T , π o)] ∝ Eq(s1: T ,π o)[ln q(sτ | πo)] + Eq(s1: T ,π o)

"

ln Y

> κ̸=τ

q(sκ| πo)

#

− Eq(s1: T ,π o)[ln p(s1: T , o 1: t, π o)] = Eq(sτ |πo)[ln q(sτ | πo)] + Eq(s−τ | πo)

"

ln Y

> κ̸=τ

q(sκ| πo)

#

− Eq(s1: T ,π o)[ln p(s1: T , o 1: t, π o)] .

(8) In (8), Eq(s−τ | πo)[·] is the expectation over all factors excluding q(sτ | πo). Here, q(sτ | πo) is constant for all variables in q(s1: T , π o) except q(sτ | πo) and Q 

> κ̸=τ

q(sκ| πo) is constant with respect to q(sτ | πo). To minimize F [q(s1: T , π o)] with respect to q(sτ | πo), we rearrange (8) to reach the Euler–Lagrange step that gives the coordinate ascent variational update: 

F [q(s1: T , π o)] = Eq(sτ |πo)[ln q(sτ | πo)] − Eq(s1: T ,π o)[ln p(s1: T , o 1: t, π o)] + K

= Eq(sτ |πo)

ln q(sτ | πo) − Eq(s−τ | πo)[ln p(s1: T , o 1: t, π o)]  + K

= Eq(sτ |πo)[ln q(sτ | πo) − ln q∗(sτ | πo)] + K

= DKL 

q(sτ |πo) ∥ q∗(sτ | πo) + K. (9) Thus, minimizing F [q(s1: T , π o)] is equivalent to minimizing DKL 

q(sτ |πo) ∥ q∗(sτ | πo). Here, 

ln q∗(sτ | πo) ≜ Eq(s−τ | πo)[ln p(s1: T , o 1: t, π o)] is the optimal posterior that minimizes F [q(s1: T , π o)] 24 

and K represents the constant terms. Considering that only the factors in (2) that incorporate sτ

remain as a result of the expectation, then we can write the message passing equation: 

ln q∗(sτ | πo) ∝ Eq(sτ −1|πo)[ln p(sτ | sτ −1, π o)] 

| {z }

> prior forward transition

+ Eq(sτ +1 |πo)[ln p(sτ +1 | sτ , π o)] 

| {z }

> prior backward transition

+ 1{τ ≤t} ln p(oτ | sτ )

| {z }

> observation

= ln Bπo,τ −1 sπo,τ −1

| {z }

> message 1

+ ln B⊤ 

> πo,τ

sπo,τ +1 

| {z }

> message 2

+ ln A⊤ oτ

| {z }

> message 3

, (10) where sπo,τ −1, sπo,τ +1 , and oτ represent the vector representations of the belief distributions 

q(sτ −1 | πo), q(sτ +1 | πo), and q(oτ | πo), respectively. In (10), message 1 propagates beliefs forward through the transition model ln Bπo,τ −1sπo,τ −1, capturing what the agent expects the current state to be, based on its history. Also, message 2 propagates beliefs backward from future states through ln B⊤ 

> πo,τ

sπo,τ +1 , capturing what the current state must have been given where the agent is heading. Message 3 grounds both predictions in actual sensory evidence through ln A⊤oτ , incorporating the likelihood of the current observation under the observation model. Thus, the posterior belief q∗(sτ | πo) will be the sum of these three messages, combining past predictions, future expectations, and present observations into a unified state estimate. To ensure that the expectations required for message updates in (10) admit tractable and closed-form solutions, we consider that the world model belongs to the conjugate-exponential family .This is reasonable since the conjugate-exponential family is the class of distributions where the posterior retains the same functional form as the prior after incorporating new observations [38]. This property ensures that belief updates remain closed-form and tractable at every time step, which is a necessary condition for the message passing updates in (10) to be computationally feasible as the agent accumulates observations over time. In this formulation, both the transition and likelihood models in (10) are categorical distributions , while their parameters admit Dirichlet priors [42]. Herein, the categorical–Dirichlet conjugacy ensures that the resulting posteriors of the inferred states maintain the same functional form as their priors. Effectively, each column of the likelihood matrix A and transition matrices Bπ,τ ∀π ∈ Π represents a categorical distribution, whose parameters are governed by Dirichlet distributions that evolve over time. This conjugacy allows natural parameters of exponential-family distributions to be passed as messages, enabling efficient inference and learning within the world model W and policy πo. Accordingly, we will show in Section V how this conjugacy translates to enabling efficient and tractable parameter updates of the world model W and policy πo. Notably, inference of states at time τ = 1 and 

τ = T will drop messages 1 and 3 in (10), respectively. 25 

To transform the the log posterior in (10) into a probability distribution, we perform a softmax to normalize the product of all passed messages, as follows: 

sπo,τ = σ



ln Bπo,τ −1 sπo,τ −1 + ln B⊤ 

> πo,τ

sπo,τ +1 + ln A⊤ oτ



. (11) While VMP updates provide a closed-form solution for obtaining q∗(sτ | πo) under conjugacy, we note that we can alternatively express the same updates as a gradient descent on prediction errors. This highlights how perception as inference could be generally implemented even in the absence of conjugacy. Moreover, it is imperative to highlight this alternative solution to draw contrast with the gradient descent solution that minimizes the expected prediction errors through action, as will be explained further in Section IV. To implement this belief update dynamically, we introduce the state prediction error ϵπ,τ = ln Bπo,τ −1 sπo,τ −1 + ln B⊤ 

> πo,τ

sπo,τ +1 + ln A⊤ oτ −

ln sπo,τ . This prediction error corresponds to the VFE’s rate of change w.r.t. sπo,τ , i.e., ϵπo,τ =

− ∂F πo

∂sπo,τ 

. This can be seen from the rearrangement of the VFE by substituting (10) into (9), as follows: 

F [q(s1: T , π o)] ∝ Eq(sτ |πo)

h

ln q(sτ | πo) − Eq(sτ −1|πo)[ln p(sτ | sτ −1, π o)] + Eq(sτ +1 |πo)[ln p(sτ +1 | sτ , π o)] + 1{τ ≤t} ln p(oτ | sτ )

i

= sπo,τ .

h

ln sπo,τ − ln Bπo,τ −1 sπo,τ −1 − ln B⊤ 

> πo,τ

sπo,τ +1 − ln A⊤ oτ

i

= −sπo,τ . ϵπo,τ . (12) Hence, ϵπo,τ = −F [q(s1: T , π o)] 

sπo,τ 

≈ −∇ sπo,τ F πo when considering that each message passing update conforms to a gradient step that transitions sπo,τ towards the fixed-point solution in (10). Thus, this solution is iteratively reached by iterating the following gradient steps in dual (logit) coordinates until ϵπo,τ is minimized: 



ϵπo,τ ← ln Bπo,τ −1 sπo,τ −1 + ln B⊤ 

> πo,τ

sπo,τ +1 + ln A⊤ oτ − ln sπo,τ ,

ln sπo,τ ← ln sπo,τ + ϵπo,τ ,

sπo,τ ← σ(ln sπo,τ ).

(13) This operation is performed over all edges sπo,τ ∀τ ∈ { 1, . . . , T } of the factor graph in Fig. 6 until the difference between updates converges to an acceptably low value. Accordingly, when 

ϵπo,τ is minimized, it is possible to approximate the posterior as q∗(s1: T , π o) ≈ p(s1: T , π o | o1: t)

according to (7). In this case, the surprise can be estimated as S (t, π o) ≃ F [q(s1: T , π o)] = 26 

P 

> τ

−sπo,τ . ϵπo,τ by considering the states sπo,τ over all time instants τ ∈ { 1, . . . , T }. Thus, the message passing updates in (10) and the gradient descent on prediction errors in (13) are two equivalent perspectives on the same inference process. In particular, the former operates as belief propagation over a graphical model such as Fig. 6, while the latter corresponds to (a form of) predictive coding in neural systems that performs a local gradient descent to minimize the mismatch between predicted and observed states. After the network estimates the posterior belief over states q∗(s1: T , π o) and the surprise 

S (t, π o), the network can now leverage these estimates to engage in planning and action selec-tion. In the following section, we will formulate planning and action as free energy minimization that aims to minimize prediction error over future trajectories. By the end of this process, the physical AI agent scales their policy πo to generalize in the unforeseen scenario. IV. P LANNING & A CTION AS INFERENCE : M INIMIZING EXPECTED FREE ENERGY 

When the prediction error exceeds its threshold ϵ during perception, the AI agent can infer that it is facing an unforeseen scenario. The network responds by engaging in counterfactual reasoning over alternative policies in an attempt to minimize this prediction error over future time instants. As both perception and planning aim to minimize prediction error (or equivalently maximize model evidence), it is possible to view planning as an extension of perception. While VFE quantifies the surprise incurred by the AI agent at the current time t given past observations, the EFE is introduced to extend this notion forward in time by computing the surprise that the agent anticipates incurring under each policy π ∈ Π over future trajectories. Thereby, EFE shifts inference from just explaining past and current observations o1: t to optimizing future behavior 

τ > t . Thus, the network evaluates these policies π according to the EFE to further capture the surprise per action values QS (a, s t), ∀a ∈ A . Subsequently, the network shares these values back with the physical AI agent as an inferred policy ψ to scale its policy πo by which it can take action. To determine the EFE that bounds surprise over future time instants 14 , we extend the notion of VFE in (2) to future time steps τ > t . As future observations ot+1: T have not been encountered    

> 14 Since free energy upper bounds surprise and the Boltzmann distribution is the canonical distribution over energy-bounded quantities, this provides additional theoretical evidence that modeling the likelihood of QS(a, s t)as a Boltzmann distribution in (6) is well-founded. 27

yet, they can be treated as a random variable [43]. Accordingly, we can define the per-step EFE 

at time τ as follows: 

G(τ, π o) := Eq(oτ ,s τ |πo)

 ln q(sτ | πo) − ln p(oτ , s τ | πo). (14) Then, we can find the EFE under a fixed policy πo over the future horizon t < τ ≤ T according to the following proposition. 

Proposition 1. The EFE can be decomposed into a measure of divergence (i.e., risk of deviation) between the expected observations from πo and the preferences of the AI agent that are encoded as a likelihood over observations (i.e., p(oτ | C)) plus the expected ambiguity (i.e., likelihood entropy), as follows: 

G(τ, π o) = DKL 

q(oτ | πo) ∥ p(oτ | C)| {z }

> goal-directed behavior (preference matching)

+ Eq(sτ |πo)H

h

p(oτ | sτ )

i| {z }

> epistemic value (uncertainty reduction)

, (15) 

where the model evidence depends on the preferences C encoded within W to shape the prior preference p(oτ | C).Proof: See Appendix B. 

Proposition 1 shows that planning is simultaneously controlled by two complementary objec-tives 15 . The first objective is goal-directed, where the AI agent favors policies whose actions cause expected observations to align with its preferences. Thereby, the EFE penalizes any deviation between what the AI agent expects and what it prefers. The second objective minimizes uncertainty, where the AI agent is intrinsically motivated to seek states that reduce ambiguity about its world model, naturally balancing exploitation of known preferred states with exploration of uncertain ones. After connecting the EFE to the POMDP and VMP in Section III, it is now possible to write down the EFE from policy πo as the sum of the individual EFE over future time instants                                

> 15 Alternatively, the EFE admits adecomposition into epistemic and pragmatic value as: G(τ, π o)=
> −Eq(o,s |πo)
> ln q(s|o, π o)−ln q(s|πo)−Eq(o|πo)
> ln p(o|C),where the first term is the epistemic value, capturing the expected information gain as the log ratio between posterior and prior beliefs about states [40]. Since it is subtracted, minimizing EFE drives the agent to maximize information gain, endowing it with an intrinsically information-seeking nature that compels it to resolve uncertainty before exploiting preferred outcomes. 28

t < τ ≤ T , as follows: 

G(πo) = 

> T

X 

> τ=t+1

G(τ, π o) = 

> T

X 

> τ=t+1

DKL 

q(oτ | πo) ∥ p(oτ | C) + Eq(sτ |πo)H

h

p(oτ | sτ )

i

=

> T

X 

> τ=t+1

As πo,τ ·



ln As πo,τ − ln c



− diag  AT ln A · sπo,τ , (16) where c encodes the prior preferences of the AI agent embedded within W. Furthermore, without loss of generality, the EFE from the alternative policies G(π) can be determined by replacing 

πo in (16) with π ∈ Π. Nevertheless, ensuring an adequate assessment between policies requires that all policies π ∈ Π start from the same state at time t, i.e., q(st|πo) = q(st|π). To evaluate the policies that are likely to minimize EFE, we consider updating their posterior probabilities 

q(π) according to the following corollary. 

Corollary 1. Given the world model W(s1: T , o 1: T , π ), the variational update for policies q(π)

satisfies ln q(π) ∝ − G(π), ∀π ∈ Π.Proof: See Appendix C. 

Unlike conventional policy selection which is fixed after training the update ln q(π) ∝ − G(π)

in Corollary 1 is recomputed at test time through variational inference over the world model 

W. This dynamically re-weights policies in response to surprise under the current, unforeseen environmental conditions. This is the inference-driven mechanism underlying test-time scaling, where reasoning can contextualize policy selection of AI in favor of minimizing EFE. To oprerationalise this scaling process, we introduce π ≜ (π1, π 2, . . . , π |Π|) to capture the EFE of policies πi ∈ Π. Then, we normalize ln q∗(π) to become a probability distribution while weighing it with the precision γ as q∗(π) = σ  − γG, where G ≜ [G(π1), G (π2), . . . , G (π|Π|)] .Accordingly, we can approximate the term exp ( −γQ S (a, s t)) in (6) with ψ(a | st, π) = 

P 

> π∈Π

δ(a, π (t)) q∗(π), ∀a ∈ A . Then, the network shares this inferred policy ψ(a | st, π) with the AI agent to scale the policy πo, as stated in (6). Thus, the AI agent will now perform a belief update from its prior policy πo(a, s t) to acquire a posterior π′

> o

(a | st) by considering the likelihood that actions minimize EFE as scored in ψ(a |

st, π). Nevertheless, this process should still incorporate the level of surprise that modulates the degree to which beliefs are updated. In addition, it can still be challenging to normalize π′

> o

(a | st)

due to the intractability of the marginal likelihood of future observations, as explained in Section II. To overcome this intractable inference problem, we address it from an equivalent perspective 29 𝜋 𝑜   

> Markov Blanket
> Internal
> states
> External
> states
> Sensory
> states
> Active
> states
> Policy
> Scaling
> Sensing Perception
> Planning World
> Model
> Asset DT
> Action

Fig. 7: Illustration of the Markov Blanket that statistically separates the AI agent from its external environment. 

that views the AI agent as a random dynamical system in interaction with its environment. Using state flow methods from statistical physics, we can then analyze the behavior of this system as it maintains NESS to survive. In particular, this flow can describe how the policy πo must update based on ψ(a | st, π). Effectively, we will next show how this approach provides a brain-inspired solution to the scale the policy πo into π′ 

> o

at test time. From a physics standpoint, an AI agent that generalizes in the physical world can be viewed as a random dynamical system that persists over time 16 . This physical system persists by preserving a statistical boundary that separates it as an entity from its environment (see Fig. 7). In particular, this boundary statistically separates the internal beliefs of the AI agent from the external states of the world and is essentially a Markov blanket [44]. For our system, a Markov blanket can be defined as follows. 

Definition 3. A set of states b = {o ∈ O , a ∈ A} forms a Markov blanket separating the states of the real-world environment μ ∈ U (i.e., external states) and the beliefs about the states 

> 16 Although the network is actually the agent performing active inference, it is considered that it is performing it on behalf of the AI agent (i.e., autonomous vehicle) that is the central entity that should generalize in the unforeseen scenario here. 30

s ∈ S (i.e., internal states) iff they are conditionally independent given b, i.e., μ ⊥⊥ s | b. This conditional independence can be expressed as [45]: 

p(s, μ | b) = p(s | b) p(μ | b) ⇐⇒ p(s | b, μ ) = p(s | b) ⇐⇒ p(μ | b, s ) = p(μ | b).

Accordingly, the AI agent persists (i.e., survives) in the world by ensuring that this Markov blanket is always maintained. Consequently, this implies that the states of this dynamical system must flow so as to preserve this Markov blanket over time. To formalise this, it is necessary to capture the flow of these states. Here, the state equations of this random dynamical system can be described according to the following differential equation and determined by the corresponding flow (i.e., drift) f :

˙x = f (x) + ω ; f (x) = 



fμ(o, a, μ )

fo(o, μ, a )

fs(o, s, a )

fa(s, a, o )



, (17) where x = {μ, o, s, a }, ω ∼ N (0 , Γ) is a symmetric positive-definite diffusion (i.e., covariance) matrix of the random noise fluctuations from the environment, and Γ is the tensor representing half the amplitude of these fluctuations [46]. Accordingly, the dynamics of this random dynamical system can be formalized in terms of the Fokker-Planck equation which governs the temporal evolution of the probability density of the states p(x, t ), as follows 17 :

∂p (x, t )

∂t = −∇ · f (x) p(x, t ) + ∇ · Γ ∇p(x, t ). (18) Here, (18) describes how the probability density over the system’s states evolves over time under the drift f (x) and diffusion Γ. Since this density encodes the system’s beliefs over its states (i.e., sensory, internal, and active states), the two are directly connected through the same underlying dynamics. Specifically, the drift f (x) plays the role of the belief update rules in (3) and (6), steering the system toward states that consistently maximize model evidence. This stands in contrast to RL, which optimizes the policy through reward maximization without accounting for the NESS structure of the system that needs to be maintained at test time. Thereby, this 

> 17 We note that at this moment we can alternatively refer to the Master Equation to describe the dynamics of the probability density, being a special case of the Fokker-Planck equation [47]. Thus, the same conclusions can be reached. 31

leaves the underlying stochastic dynamics unmodeled while missing the connection to belief updating of policies in unforeseen scenario at test time. Since the AI agent works to maintain its survival whereby it self-organizes towards its preferences, this means that the dynamical system must conserve its NESS. In this case, the probability flow is balanced while having a continuous flux, yet the probability density p(x, t )

remains invariant to achieve a steady state. Henceforth, the probability density p(x, t ) converges into an ergodic density p∗(x). Thus, the preferred states in p∗(x) act as a pullback attractor for this dynamical system, encoding the set points where the AI agent survives. Effectively, (18) can then be simplified into a stationary density setting. In this case, we can determine the flow of the states in this NESS which ensure the persistence of a Markov blanket according to the following lemma. 

Lemma 2. For a stochastic dynamical system that admits a Markov blanket in NESS, the drift 

f (x) of its states can be decomposed into: 

f (x) = −Γ∇L(x) + R∇L(x) = (Γ − R)∇ ln p∗(x), (19) 

where L(x) = − ln p∗(x) is the Lagrangian (i.e., potential function) associated with the steady-state density p∗(x), and R is an antisymmetric solenoidal operator. Proof: See Appendix D. 

From Lemma 2, we observe that the states of any random dynamical system that preserves a Markov blanket will flow towards their preferences, and thereby, minimize surprise [48]. Based on Lemma 1, the states of this random dynamical system equivalently flow towards minimizing their VFE which upper bounds surprise. In particular, the flow fa(s, a, o ) must drive the active states a ∈ A towards these regions of low free energy, i.e., fa(s, a, o ) = (Γ −R)∇a ln p(s, a, o ) ≤

(R − Γ) ∇aF (s, a, o ). In the case of a surprise, the active states (which correspond to the actions taken by the agent) are therefore flowing from πo(a, s t) to ψ(a | st, π) to minimize free energy 

F (s, a, o ). Nevertheless, this transition from πo(a | st) to ψ(a | st, π) should still be modulated according to the magnitude of the surprise S (t, π o). Effectively, this flow is then equivalent to performing a gradient descent over the free energy landscape while considering the impact of sur-prise. Here, the free energy in terms of active states is F (s, a, o ) ∝ DKL (π′

> o

(a | st) ∥ ψ(a | st, π)) .Hence, minimizing F (s, a, o ) is proportional to minimizing the KL divergence between the 

π′

> o

(a | st) and ψ(a | st, π). Following a similar derivation to (12), we define the action 32 Stopping Criterion 

Base 

Policy 

Inferred 

Policy 

Scaled 

Policy 

Fig. 8: Illustration of the gradient descent operation over the Lagrangian to capture the scaled policy as derived in (20) and (21). 

prediction error as ϵπo,ψ = ∇aF (s, a, o ) = ln ψ(a | st, π) − ln π′

> o

(a | st). Here, the posterior beliefs about the actions are obtained through a gradient descent as in (13). Starting initially from π′

> o

(a | st) = πo(a | st), the scaled policy π′(a | st) can then be reached through an iterative update that consists of the following steps: 



ϵπo,ψ ← ln ψ(a | st, π) − ln π′

> o

(a | st),

ln π′

> o

(a | st) ← ln π′

> o

(a | st) + ϵπo,ψ ,π′

> o

(a | st) ← σ  ln π′

> o

(a | st).

(20) As this gradient descent operation corresponds to the soft Bayesian update in (6), the scaled policy π′

> o

(a | st) is reached once a stopping criterion is met. This stopping criterion will incorporate the effect of surprise S (t, π o), whereby the gradient descent stops iterating when the remaining KL divergence has been reduced to the surprise-dependent target θ. This target 33 

can be defined through an exponential normalization over surprise, i.e., θ(S ) = 1 −exp( −ΩS ):

DKL [π′

> o

(a | st) ∥ ψ(a | st, π)] ≤ (1 − θ) DKL [πo(a | st) ∥ ψ(a | st, π)] + ς, (21) where 0 ≤ ς < θ is a tolerance error for numerical precision and Ω > 0 is a saturation parameter. As shown in Fig. 8, this update implements policy scaling via gradient descent, where the prediction error ϵπo,ψ drives the policy π′ 

> o

toward the posterior ψ(a | st, π) through iterative belief refinement (i.e., inference). This constitutes the operational realization of the test-time scaling law derived in (6). It represents the central contribution of the paper, which provides a principled inference-driven mechanism for dynamically scaling the policy at test time in response to prediction errors, without requiring retraining. However, scaling the policy at test time is insufficient for long-term survival, as it only provides an instant solution for generalization. Over time, the agent must also consolidate these resolved instances into its world model W and base policy πo to retain this knowledge for future encounters. This natural motivation for survival drives the AI agent to learn at test time. In the following section, we derive how this learning proceeds, enabling the AI agent to generalize beyond its training distribution and reduce future surprise by retaining knowledge of previously unseen scenarios. V. L EARNING AT TEST TIME : U PDATING THE WORLD MODEL AND POLICY VIA INFERENCE 

At the end of the time interval T , the surprising instances that have been resolved represent an opportunity for the AI agent to “learn by experience” from the world [49]. It is important to distinguish this from test-time inference. On the one hand, the latter operates on a fast timescale, scaling the policy through a belief update driven by surprise without modifying any model parameters. On the other hand, learning operates on a slower timescale by performing parameter updates to the world model W and policy πo to permanently incorporate the resolved instances. The goal of this learning is to incorporate these instances into the world model W and policy 

πo such that they become more predictable by the agent and less surprising in the future . In other words, the AI agent becomes less susceptible to similar situations when encountered again, whereby action selection can progressively shift from being dominated by deliberative reasoning to a fast, feed-forward decision. This update process is a natural consequence of the survival objective that intrinsically drives AI agents to continuously learn at test time. Unlike perception, planning, and action that require inference to perform instantaneous belief updates, learning is associated with synaptic plasticity dynamics (i.e., Hebbian plasticity) that 34 

usually occur at a lower pace and over a longer time period [50]. This is due to the fact that learning requires an accumulation of evidence about the world to permanently update parameters. On the one hand, the parameters of the likelihood model A and transition model 

B defined in Section III would need to reflect the effect of the surprising pairs of states and observations. On the other hand, the policy πo needs to consolidate the actions sampled from its scaled version π′

> o

. Thus, learning can be cast as a Bayesian update of these parameters, given observations, inferred hidden states, and scaled actions. Consequently, learning can then be modeled as Bayesian inference over these parameters, in attempt to minimize the prediction errors (i.e., VFE). Henceforth, in this section, we will explain how learning via inference enhances its experience through continuous interaction with the world. This learning stage closes the loop between test-time scaling and training-time adaptation [51]. In particular, it converts the inference-driven policy updates – accumulated during deployment – into permanent parameter updates of the world model W and policy πo, thereby consolidating test-time experience into long-term knowledge. 

A. Updating the World Model: Observation Model A

To incorporate the learning process within inference, it is necessary to expand the world model 

W(o1: T , s 1: T , π ) in (2) to include the likelihood model A and transition model B, as follows 18 :

p(o1: T , s 1: T , π, A, B) = p(π)p(A)p(B)p(s1)

> T

Y 

> τ=2

p(sτ | sτ −1, π, B)

> T

Y 

> τ=1

p(oτ | sτ , A). (22) By following steps similar to (7) – (9), we aim to find the optimal posterior q∗(A) that minimizes the VFE. Here, the VFE is captured in its expanded form as: 

F [q(s1: T , π o, A, B)] = Eq(s1: T ,π o,A,B)[ln q(s1: T , π o, A, B) − ln p(s1: T , o 1: T , π o, A, B)] . (23) Then, we consider minimizing F [q(s1: T , π o, A, B)] with respect to A under a mean field approx-imation, i.e., q(s1: T , π o, A, B) ≈ q(πo)q(A)q(B) QTτ =1 q(sτ | πo). This approximation assumes that the parameters A, B, and the policy πo are mutually independent, and that the states of the world factorize across time given the policy πo. While this renders inference tractable – by decomposing the joint distribution into independent factors that can be optimized separately – it neglects conditional dependencies between parameters and states. Hence, it represents a tradeoff       

> 18 Subscripts from Bπ,τ are dropped for simplicity, while noting that πis considered to be the base policy πoin this case. 35

between computational tractability and approximation accuracy. Accordingly, we can rewrite the VFE in (23) as follows: 

F [q(A)] ∝ Eq(A)[ln q(A)] − Eq(s1: T ,π o,A,B)[ln p(s1: T , o 1: T , π o, A, B)] = Eq(A)

h

ln q(A) − Eq(s1: T ,π o,B)[ln p(s1: T , o 1: T , π o, A, B)] 

| {z } 

> ln q∗(A)

i

= DKL 

q(A) ∥ q∗(A). (24) Therefore, the VFE can be minimized with respect to A through the following Euler-Lagrange step solution that minimizes the KL divergence in (24) : 

ln q∗(A) = Eq(s1: T ,π o,B)[ln p(s1: T , o 1: T , π o, A, B)] (25) Considering that the terms that depend on A from (22) are the only ones that remain as variables in (25), we can further simply (25) that yields: 

ln q∗(A)

| {z }

> posterior

∝ ln p(A)

| {z }

> prior

+

> T

X 

> τ=1

Eq(sτ )[ln p(oτ | sτ , A)] 

| {z }

> likelihood

. (26) As discussed earlier in Section III, the likelihood A is formally defined as a categorical distribution, i.,e., p(oτ | sτ , A) = Cat( oτ |A sτ ). Here, each column A·j represents a categorical distribution over possible observations oτ conditioned on the state sτ . With p(oτ = i | sτ =

j, A) = Aij to index the entries of A, the expected log-likelihood in (26) can be modified to become: 

Eq(sτ )[ln p(oτ | sτ , A)] = 

> |S|

X

> j=1

q(sτ = j)

> |O|

X

> i=1

1{oτ =i} ln Aij , (27) where 1{oτ =i} is an indicator function that equals 1 when the observed outcome oτ corresponds to i.Subsequently, each column A·j of the likelihood matrix A is parameterized by a Dirichlet distribution, i.e., p(A·j ) = Dir( A·j | α·j ) with concentration parameters α·j = [ α1j , . . . , α |O| j ]⊤.Here, each αij ∈ R>0 denotes a prior pseudo-count over observation i given state j. Assum-ing that the columns of A are independent, p(A) can be modeled as a product of Dirichlet distributions, as follows: 

p(A) = 

> |S|

Y

> j=1

Dir( A·j | α·j ) = 

> |S|

Y

> j=1

1

B(α·j )

> |O|

Y

> i=1

Aαij −1 

> ij

, (28) 36 

where B(α·j ) = 

Q|O|  

> i=1

Ψ( αij )Ψ( P|O|  

> i=1

αij ) is the multivariate Beta function and Ψ( ·) is the Gamma function. Then, substituting (27) and (28) back in (26) yields: 

ln q∗(A) ∝

> |O|

X

> i=1
> |S|

X

> j=1

"

αij − 1 + 

> T

X 

> τ=1

1{oτ =i}q(sτ = j)

#

ln Aij , (29) which is recognized as the logarithm of a Dirichlet distribution whose concentration parameters are α′ 

> ij

≜ αij + PTτ =1 1{oτ =i}q(sτ = j). Henceforth, this yields a posterior Dirichlet distribution which factorizes into the form: 

q∗(A) = 

> |S|

Y

> j=1

Dir  A·j α′·j

 , (30) where α′·j ≜ [α′ 

> 1j

, . . . , α ′|O| j ]⊤ represent the updated concentration parameters over each column 

A·j . Intuitively, learning thus corresponds to updating the prior Dirichlet parameters by accu-mulating expected co-occurrences between sensory observations i and inferred hidden states j.Consequently, this increases the corresponding concentration parameter αij . Equivalently, learn-ing can be viewed as updating the concentration parameters of the Dirichlet distribution by accumulating soft counts of outcome–state co-occurrences over time, weighted by the inferred posterior over hidden states q∗(sτ ).

B. Updating the World Model: Transition Model B

Similar to the derivation for the likelihood parameters A in (24) - (26), we can now derive the posterior over the transition probabilities B. To minimize the VFE in (23) with respect to 

B, the terms that depend on B are only those involving p(B) and p(sτ | sτ −1, B). Hence, we can derive the Euler-Lagrange solution for B as: 

ln q∗(B) ∝ ln p(B) + 

> T

X 

> τ=2

Eq(sτ ,s τ −1)[ln p(sτ | sτ −1, B)] . (31) Here, the policy π is dropped from log likelihood term in (31) because it is treated as a fixed parameter, having the AI agent committed to πo. Moreover, the transition model is defined as categorical distribution such that p(sτ | sτ −1, B) = Cat( sτ | B sτ −1). In particular, each column 

B·j defines a categorical distribution over states sτ given the previous state sτ −1, indexed with entries p(sτ = i | sτ −1 = j, B) = Bij . Therefore, the expected log likelihood term in (31) becomes: 

Eq(sτ ,s τ −1)[ln p(sτ | sτ −1, B)] = 

> |S|

X

> j=1
> |S|

X

> i=1

q(sτ −1 = j, s τ = i) ln Bij . (32) 37 

Then, we assume a Dirichlet prior over each column of the transition matrix, i.e., p(B·j ) = Dir( B·j | β·j ) having concentration parameters β·j = [ β1j , . . . , β |S| j ]⊤. With p(B) having a similar form to (28), this transforms (31) into: 

ln q∗(B) ∝

> S

X

> j=1
> S

X

> i=1

βij − 1 + 

> T

X 

> τ=2

q(sτ −1 = j, s τ = i)

!

ln Bij , (33) which is recognized as the logarithm of a Dirichlet distribution whose concentration parameters are β′ 

> ij

≜ βij + PTτ =2 q(sτ −1 = j, s τ = i). Thus, this yields a posterior Dirichlet distribution for 

B with concentration parameters β′·j = [ β′ 

> 1j

, . . . , β ′|S| j ]⊤ over each column j. Henceforth, q∗(B)

can be factorized into the following form: 

q∗(B) = 

> |S|

Y

> j=1

Dir( B·j | β′·j ). (34) Next, we will derive how the policy πo can be updated to incorporate the resolved, surprising situations by consolidating the actions acquired through reasoning from the scaled policy π′

> o

.

C. Updating the Policy πo

As the likelihood and transition parameters (i.e., A and B, respectively) of the world model are updated to better anticipate the surprising situations, the policy πo must also adapt to incorporate the actions that successfully resolve these new situations. This consolidation is a key conceptual step, whereby reasoning-derived actions that proved effective in unforeseen scenarios are gradually absorbed into the habitual base policy πo. Effectively, this converts the action discovered through deliberative reasoning into effortless, feed-forward behavior. Thus, learning closes the loop between test-time scaling and long-term policy adaptation. This learning update can be modeled as an inference process which aims to find the optimal posterior q∗(πo) that minimizes the VFE in (23). Similar to (25), the Euler-Lagrange step that minimizes (23) with respect to πo is found to be: 

ln q∗(πo) = Eq(s1: T ,A,B)) [ln p(o1: T , s 1: T , π o, A, B)] . (35) From (22), the only terms that remain in (35) are those that depend on πo, namely p(πo) and 

p(sτ | sτ −1, π o, B). Hence, we can simplify (35) to become: 

ln q∗(πo) ∝ ln p(πo) + Eq(s1: T ,B)

" TX 

> τ=2

ln p(sτ | sτ −1, π o, B)

#

. (36) 38 

To explicitly expose the dependence on πo in (36), we separate the process of action selection under policy πo from state transitions driven by action aτ , such that 19 :

p(sτ | sτ −1, π o, B) = X 

> aτ∈A

p(sτ | sτ −1, a τ , B)

| {z }

> state transition

p(aτ | sτ −1, π o)

| {z }

> action selection

. (37) Given that the sequence of actions a1: T have been selected and executed during time T , the summation in (37) can be reduced to a single instance. In addition, the terms that depend on 

πo in (37) effectively reduce (i.e., p(sτ | sτ −1, a τ , B) does not depend on πo) to the policy likelihoods p(aτ | sτ −1, π o). Thus, (36) can be expressed as: 

ln q∗(πo) ∝ ln p(πo) + Eq(s1: T ,a 1: T )

" TX 

> τ=2

ln p(sτ | sτ −1, a τ , B)p(aτ | sτ −1, π o)

#

= ln p(πo) + Eq(s1: T ,a 1: T )

" TX 

> τ=2

ln p(aτ | sτ −1, π o)

#

, (38) where the expectation Eq(·) is taken over the actions a1: T that are included into the world model in (22). Then, the policy likelihood 20 is defined as a categorical distribution over actions given the previous state, i.e., p(aτ | sτ −1, π o) = Cat( aτ | ˜Πsτ −1). Here, ˜Π is the likelihood matrix of choosing action aτ state in sτ −1 under policy πo. Thus, each column ˜Π·j defines a categorical distribution over actions given previous states, indexed with the entries p(aτ = i | sτ −1 =

j, π o) = ˜Πij . Therefore, the expected policy likelihood term in (38) can be expressed as: 

Eq(s1: T ,a 1: T )

" TX 

> τ=2

ln p(aτ | sτ −1, π o)

#

=

> T

X 

> τ=2
> |S|

X

> j=1
> |A|

X

> i=1

q(sτ −1 = j) 1{aτ =i} ln ˜Πij , (39) whereby it represents the expected number of times action aτ = i was taken in state sτ −1 = j,given inferred states. Moreover, we assume a Dirichlet prior over each column ˜Π·j such that 

p( ˜Π·j ) = Dir( ˜Π·j | ν·j ) having concentration parameters ν·j = [ ν1j , . . . , ν |A| j ]⊤. With p(πo) = 

p( ˜Π) = Q|S| 

> j=1

Dir( ˜Π·j | ν·j ), (38) transforms into: 

ln q∗(πo) ∝

> |S|

X

> j=1
> |A|

X

> i=1

 νij − 1 + 

> T

X 

> τ=2

q(sτ −1 = j) 1{aτ =i}

 ln ˜Πij , (40) which corresponds to a logarithmic of a product of Dirichlet distributions with concentration parameters ν′ 

> ij

= νij + PTτ =2 q(sτ −1 = j) 1{aτ =i}. Therefore, this yields a posterior Dirichlet                     

> 19 The policy πoencodes the probability of selecting each action in a given state, while the transition model p(sτ|sτ−1, a τ,B)
> captures how those actions influence the subsequent states.
> 20 The policy likelihood p(aτ|sτ−1, π o)in the PFC has an equivalent role to the policy πoin the BG. 39 Observation Model 𝑨 Transition Model 𝑩 Policy 𝜋 𝑜
> World Model
> Asset DT

𝑜 𝜏 

𝑠 𝜏 

++

𝑠 𝜏 -1

𝑠 𝜏  +

𝑠 𝜏 

𝑎 𝜏 

> Reinforcement of
> new experience
> Reinforcement of
> new experience

Fig. 9: Illustration of the learning process that is modeled as inference to reinforce the new experiences discovered at test time to enable continually learning the policy of the physical AI agent and the world model. 

distribution with concentration parameters ν′·j = [ ν′ 

> 1j

, . . . , ν ′|A| j ] over each column j, which factorizes into: 

q∗(πo) = 

> |S|

Y

> j=1

Dir( ˜Π·j | ν′·j ). (41) This showcases how updating the policy πo in the PFC corresponds to a Dirichlet accumulation of state–action evidence which reinforces this new behavior discovered via reasoning (i.e., VFE minimization). In fact, it shows how prior pseudo-counts νij are transformed with empirical, surprising experience into the posterior ν′ 

> ij

. Subsequently, the inferred posterior policy thus moves from the PFC to the BG to reflect this update on the policy πo. Remarkably, this observation demonstrates how DTs play a crucial role in autonomously updating the policy of the physical AI agent in the real world 21 . While DTs indeed drive the world model W to instill reasoning in physical AI agents so as to generalize at test time, learning shows that the connection between the PT and DTs must also be used to update the policy πo as a natural consequence of survival. Clearly, learning exploits the same PFC-BG connection used during 

> 21 Alternatively, in a deep learning scenario, this Bayesian learning update corresponds to a continual learning solution. Therein, the prior policy is updated with new accumulated evidence from the physical world (e.g., via elastic weight consolidation [52]). 40

test-time scaling. The resulting policy update in the PFC in (41) is then reflected back to the BG. This reduces the prediction errors upon future encounters with similar new situations 22 . In fact, this learning can compensate for situations that were not essentially covered throughout the training time, but with a higher cost of deliberative reasoning at test time. This learning procedure that reinforces the new experiences and updates the parameters of the world model is summarized in Fig. 9. These nested VFE minimizing processes broadly capture the basic nature of how intelligent systems adapt to the changing environments by changing their behavior in a continuous manner to ensure their “adaptive fitness”, where “fit” can be read as world model fitting, via active inference. VI. S IMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

For our simulations, we consider a physical AI agent to be an autonomous vehicle that has a driving task objective. This experiment follows the example of Fig. 4. In particular, our simulation environment models a vehicle approaching an intersection to cross towards its destination goal, given that pedestrians may appear at the traffic light intersection. Accordingly, the state space 

S comprises distance d ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3} that measures the distance to the destination, velocity of the vehicle v ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3}, traffic light state L ∈ { 0, 1} to represent red and green respectively, and pedestrian presence p ∈ { 0, 1}, yielding 64 discrete states. The action space A consists of three actions that control v: maintain , speed up , and slow down . The reward function (i.e., prior preferences) encourages rapid goal approach with a crash penalty for collisions with pedestrians at the intersection at d = 1 . In essence, the vehicular agent learns a distribution where pedestrians appear exclusively at red lights. Accordingly, an unforeseen scenario occurs at test time when pedestrians jaywalk i.e., p = 1 when L is green. This setup constitutes a controlled out-of-distribution test-time generalization benchmark, where the jaywalking scenario represents a deliberate distributional shift from the training distribution. Hence, this setup allows a rigorous evaluation of the robustness and generalization capabilities of the AI agent under unforeseen conditions. As discussed earlier, this is a meaningful use case and example that can capture the broader problem facing physical AI agents at test time and can cover other diverse examples with AI agents that are performing different tasks.     

> 22 Notably, more comprehensive solutions for identifying unforeseen scenarios that do not fall under any state sτ∈ S would need to consider methods like Bayesian model expansion as a potential treatment, which is outside the scope of this work. 41
> (a) (b)

Fig. 10: Comparison between (a) Q-learning and (b) the proposed test-time scaling on an unforeseen jaywalking scenario. In (a), the Q-learning agent crashes at Step 2 upon the pedestrian’s appearance, failing to adapt its policy. In (b), the proposed scaling law detects the pedestrian as an unforeseen scenario at Step 2, triggering a switch from feed-forward (blue) to scaled (yellow) actions, allowing the agent to safely navigate the scenario and resume its original policy once the pedestrian clears at Step 11 .

In our experiments, we compare our proposed test-time scaling solution with two benchmarks: a) Q-learning and b) Bayesian RL. In particular, Q-learning serves as model-free approach, while Bayesian RL is typically a model-based approach that relies on inference-based planning. It is worth noting that all methods share the same training data, reward function, and environment assumptions, ensuring a fair comparison that isolates the effect of test-time scaling as the differentiating factor between the approaches evaluated. Our test-time scaling solution builds on Q-learning as its underlying base policy. Both policies and the world model are trained over 6000 episodes. In addition, the values in the policies are initialized with a bias to reflect the velocity preference towards the goal in the reward structure. For simplicity, the world model is simplified into a Markov decision process with surprise measured from the state space. Unless otherwise stated, we set the parameters Ω = 0 .425 , ϵ = 0 .2, γ = 0 .5, and ς = 0 .05 .42 

Fig. 10 evaluates the performance of the baseline Q-learning policy and the proposed scaled policy in an unforeseen scenario. As shown in Fig. 10a, the vehicle starts its episode at d = 3 

and initial velocity v = 1 . As the agent moves forward, an unforeseen scenario appears at step 2. In particular, the pedestrian appears when the agent is approximately at d = 2 from the goal and traveling at velocity v = 1 . For Q-learning, the agent continues to accelerate even with the unforeseen scenario. Typically, this reflects the overconfident generalization whereby the agent’s learned association between green traffic lights and safe acceleration, reinforced across training episodes, dominates in this new pedestrian situation. Eventually, this leads to a collision at step 3

and episode termination. As a result, Q-learning fails to complete the episode under this unseen condition. Similarly, the pedestrian is encountered at the same step and distance in the case of the proposed, scaled policy, as shown in Fig. 10b. Nevertheless, the agent detects the unforeseen scenario. Accordingly, the agent reasons to minimize its VFE. In contrast to the Q-learning solution, the agent scales its policy to slow down its velocity to v = 0 . The agent then remains static for roughly eight steps (steps 3–11 ) while the pedestrian crosses to avoid any collision (which can increase VFE). Once the pedestrian clears at step 11, the agent resumes acceleration and reaches the destination at step 14. Overall, the agent completes the task with no collisions in case of test-time scaling, whereas Q-learning fails. This showcases the ability of the scaled policy to achieve zero-shot generalization and adapt safely at test-time, in contrast to the brittle behavior of standard Q-learning. Most importantly, this improvement stems not from retraining or additional data, but from surprise-triggered reasoning that temporarily overrides the habitual base policy πo upon detecting the out-of-distribution pedestrian. Thus, this demonstrates that test-time scaling alone is sufficient to handle unforeseen scenarios. Fig. 11 shows how the rewards of Q-learning and scaled policy progress over time steps τ .In particular, both solutions share the same rewards across the first two steps. However, as the Q-learning policy fails to generalize in response to the unforeseen scenario, it results in collision with the pedestrian incurring a penalty r = −25 at τ = 2 . This is illustrated in Fig. 11a. This is due to the fact that the policy is dominated by its task reward. Effectively, this terminates the episode. In contrast, Fig. 11b shows that surprise θ in our proposed method remains below the threshold ϵ for τ < 2, as predicted perceived states match the transitions distribution acquired 43 

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 11: Comparison between the rewards of (a) Q-learning and (b) the proposed test-time scaling over the time steps in the unforeseen scenario, with the variation of surprise levels during policy scaling in this scenario. 

during training 23 . However, as the pedestrian appears at τ = 2 having L = 1 , surprise abruptly increases to reach θ = 0 .29 and crosses the threshold ϵ. This signals an unforeseen scenario has occurred and for which the agent must reason to generalize. Here, reasoning about the EFE penalizes actions leading to non-preferred states (e.g., collision with pedestrian). As shown in Fig. 10, the agent selects to slow down, reducing velocity from v = 1 to v = 0 . The agent maintains v = 0 for 3 ≤ τ ≤ 12 while surprise remains above the threshold while the pedestrian crosses. At t = 12 , the pedestrian clears and surprise drops to θ = 0 .19 < ϵ . Hence, the agent automatically reverts to its Q-learning policy without inference. Subsequently, the agent then     

> 23 In this work, ϵis treated as a fixed threshold for simplicity. However, in general it may not need to be constant, as neuroscience suggests that the threshold for triggering deliberative reasoning is modulated by arousal, attention, and prior experience [53]. This leaves the possibility of a learned or dynamically adapted ϵas future work. 44

Fig. 12: Performance comparison in terms of training rewards, test-time rewards (in unforeseen scenario), success rate, and inference rate between Q-learning, Bayesian RL, and the proposed test-time scaling method. 

accelerates to reach its goal at τ = 14 with cumulative reward r = 22 .9. Clearly, this shows how our proposed test-time scaling method generalizes to unforeseen scenarios while outperforming Q-learning in terms of cumulative rewards that guarantee successfully finishing their episode. This fosters the premise of RL which essentially is to maximize the long-term rewards rather than the instantaneous rewards. Fig. 12 presents a comprehensive performance comparison across three methods: Q-learning, Bayesian RL, and our proposed test-time policy scaling approach. The analysis examines training reward, test-time reward, success rate on out-of-distribution scenarios, and inference rate indicat-ing computational efficiency. All three methods achieve comparable training performance, with Q-learning and the proposed scaled policy obtaining average rewards of 78 .0, while Bayesian RL achieves 72 .7. On the one hand, this similar performance is due to fact that the scaled policy and Q-learning method utilize the same objective during training, with the world model learned jointly without modifying the reward optimization process. On the other hand, the slight degradation in Bayesian RL training performance ( 6.8% lower than Q-Learning) reflects the com-putational overhead of maintaining uncertainty estimates during exploration, which constrains policy optimization efficiency. 45 

Nevertheless, Q-Learning and Bayesian RL still largely fail to adapt to the unforeseen scenario at test-time, as shown in Fig. 12. This results in an average cumulative reward of −21 .8 and 

3% success rate for Q-learning, as it lacks the necessary experience in dealing with this new situation. However, Bayesian RL demonstrates marginal improvement with test reward of −18 .2

and 5% success rate, indicating that maintaining uncertainty estimates alone provides insufficient robustness without explicitly acquiring surprise-based inference. In contrast, the proposed test-time scaling method outperforms both Q-learning and Bayesian RL by achieving a reward 

r = 22 .9 with 100% success rate. This performance gain directly stems from the surprise (i.e., VFE) detection mechanism that automatically triggers active inference and reasoning about minimizing the EFE when encountering unforeseen transitions. This preserves the agent from blindly following the policy in unforeseen scenarios, whereby the agent can survive in these instances by sacrificing its narrow task rewards to resolve its uncertainty about the world. This is clearly reflected in the drop of rewards in the scaled policy method to 22.9 at test time while achieving a 100% success rate over episodes within the evaluated environment and setup, which demonstrates how world models combined with inference-based compute scaling enable robust generalization without retraining. That said, the proposed scaling method requires only 63 .3% 

inference rate in comparison to Bayesian RL. Indeed, this corresponds to the 8 timestep window (steps 3–10 out of 14 total) where surprise exceeds threshold ϵ during the jaywalking scenario and requires reasoning therein. Hence, test-time scaling is able to achieve a computational tradeoff that balances between efficient, model-free Q-learning (i.e., no inference overhead) and model-based Bayesian RL. Hence, the proposed scaling method efficiently utilizes inference compute with over 36% enhancement in contrast to Bayesian RL which completely depends on inference. This efficiency gain reflects our central contribution, i.e., by scaling inference compute only when surprise is detected, the proposed method allocates deliberative reasoning precisely when it is needed, avoiding the constant computational overhead of full Bayesian RL while retaining generalization capabilities. Thereby, these results demonstrate that adaptive compute scaling enables safe navigation of unforeseen scenarios, while preserving efficiency on familiar states by limiting computational overhead. Fig. 13 illustrates the learning and model update dynamics of the test-time scaling approach after encountering the same unforeseen scenario over 50 episodes. In Fig. 13a, the agent ini-tially exhibits a high (non-normalized) surprise of S = 1 .95 bits upon first encountering the unforeseen jaywalking scenario at episode 0. Through repeated exposure, the world model beliefs 46  

> (a) (b)
> (c)

Fig. 13: (a) The change in surprise and update of the (b) world model and (c) policy parameters through inference while encountering the resolved unforeseen scenarios over 50 episodes. 

update such that the unforeseen scenario becomes progressively less surprising over episodes. Asymptotically, the surprise S approaches S ≈ 0.2 bits by episode 50. In this case, the agent confidently expects a pedestrian to appear in the situation. Indeed, Fig. 13b demonstrates the corresponding improvement in pedestrian prediction accuracy, whereby the pedestrian prediction accuracy at green lights P (pedestrian = 1 |L = 1 , d = 2) increases from 0.25 at episode 0 to 

0.9 as it approaches episode 50. Effectively, this indicates successful adaptation of the world model’s transition dynamics as the physical world changes in non-stationary conditions. 47 

As the probability of this situation becomes highly expected (i.e., less surprising), the agent must also update to incorporate this situation into its policy. Here, Fig. 13c shows this policy update, where the action probability to slow down increases from 0.3 to 0.92 over 50 episodes. This exemplifies the transition of action control from reasoning-based decisions to feed-forward execution as the unforeseen scenario becomes familiar with repeated experience. Henceforth, this test-time scaling approach offers computational efficiency as the unforeseen scenario becomes integrated into the world model, eliminating the need for expensive reasoning, once beliefs converge below surprise threshold. In addition, it enables a continual learning solution where the AI agent can continue to confidently learn and improve with more experience directly from its world, while limiting risks of exploration and uncertainty. These findings empirically validate the theoretical contributions introduced in Section V, confirming that learning to minimize prediction errors translates into measurable gains in terms of adaptability, generalization, and computational efficiency at test time. VII. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we have derived a test-time scaling law for physical AI agents grounded in the first principle of active inference. By equipping physical AI agents with active inference capabilities, these agents become endowed with a general objective to survive in line with their narrow task objectives. Thus, we have shown how this urge to survive can drive physical AI agents to generalize at test time through reasoning with their world model. In particular, this reasoning aims to control the surprise of the AI agent through resolving prediction errors between the world model and the real world. Thus, we have introduced a surprise per action-value that scales the policy at test time by updating it with this reasoning. We have modeled this update as a soft Bayesian inference with the reasoning being a likelihood. This update was shown to capture the biological mechanism that scales the policy in the BG with reasoning from the PFC at test time. Then, we have introduced a variational inference solution to render the inference problem tractable through free energy minimization. Through an equivalent statistical physics treatment, we have modeled the process of resolving prediction errors as a gradient descent on the free energy landscape to formalize the scaled posterior policy. Furthermore, we have shown how our framework enables physical AI agents to autonomously scale their experience while continuously interacting with the world. In particular, we have showcased how our solution extends learning beyond training by reinforcing new instances, resolved at test time, into both 48 

the policy and world model. Simulation results in an autonomous driving task have validated the proposed framework, by outperforming model-free Q-learning and model-based Bayesian RL, through achieving robust generalization to unforeseen scenarios while improving inference efficiency by over 36% .APPENDIX APROOF OF LEMMA 1Starting from the non-negativity of the KL divergence, we have: 

DKL 

h

q(s1: T , π o) ∥ p(s1: T , π o | o1: t)

i

≥ 0 = ⇒ Eq(s1: T ,π o)

h

ln q(s1: T , π o) − ln p(s1: T , π o | o1: t)

i

≥ 0.

(42) Using Bayes’ rule, we can expand the posterior: 

ln p(s1: T , π o | o1: t) = ln p(o1: t, s 1: T , π o) − ln p(o1: t | πo). (43) Substituting (43) back in (42) and rearranging the terms, we obtain: 

Eq(s1: T ,π o)

h

ln q(s1: T , π o) − ln p(o1: t, s 1: T , π o)

i| {z }  

> F[q(s1: T,π o)]

+ ln p(o1: t | πo) ≥ 0.

Thus, we reach the standard negative ELBO equation: − ln p(o1: t | πo) ≤ F [q(s1: T , π o)] . Consid-ering that the AI agent experiences an unforeseen scenario at time t whereby surprise arises, we can simplify the cumulative surprise using a mean field approximation, as follows: 

− ln p(o1: t | πo) ≈ − 

> t

X 

> τ=1

ln p(oτ | πo) = −

> t−1

X 

> τ=1

ln p(oτ | πo)

| {z }

> ≈0

− ln p(ot | πo) = − ln p(ot | πo) = S (t, π o)

Therefore, we conclude that: S (t, π o) ≤ F [q(s1: T , π o)] . Thus, the lemma is proved. APPENDIX BPROOF OF PROPOSITION 1We start from the per-step EFE for policy πo:

G(τ, π o) = Eq(oτ ,s τ |πo)

 ln q(sτ | πo) − ln p(oτ , s τ | πo). (44) Here, the expectation is taken under q(· | πo) considering both future outcomes and states given policy πo. Expanding the joint density using p(oτ , s τ | πo) = p(sτ | oτ , π o) p(oτ | πo) and separating the outcome prior (preferences) yields: 

G(τ, π o) = Eq(oτ ,s τ |πo)

 ln q(sτ | πo) − ln p(sτ | oτ , π o) − Eq(oτ ,s τ |πo)

 ln p(oτ | πo). (45) 49 

A common practice when planning in active inference is to approximate the true posterior 

p(sτ | oτ , π o) by the variational posterior q(sτ | oτ , π o). Another modification is expressing the preference prior explicit as p(oτ | C), as the model evidence depends on the preferences C

encoded within W. Making these replacements (which is the standard approximation used to expose epistemic terms) gives: 

G(τ, π o) ≈ Eq(oτ ,s τ |πo)

 ln q(sτ | πo) − ln q(sτ | oτ , π o) − Eq(oτ ,s τ |πo)

 ln p(oτ | C). (46) After expanding expectations into sums over outcomes and states and using q(oτ , s τ | πo) = 

q(sτ | πo) p(oτ | sτ ), we rearrange (46) to bring in ln q(oτ | πo) and obtain: 

G(τ, π o) = X 

> oτ,s τ

p(oτ | sτ ) q(sτ | πo)



ln q(sτ | πo)

q(sτ | oτ , π o)



− X 

> oτ,s τ

p(oτ | sτ ) q(sτ | πo) ln p(oτ | C).

= X 

> oτ,s τ

p(oτ | sτ ) q(sτ | πo)



ln q(oτ , s τ | πo)

q(sτ | oτ , π o)p(oτ | sτ )



− X 

> oτ,s τ

p(oτ | sτ ) q(sτ | πo) ln p(oτ | C).

= X 

> oτ,s τ

p(oτ | sτ ) q(sτ | πo)



ln q(oτ | πo)

p(oτ | sτ )



− X 

> oτ,s τ

p(oτ | sτ ) q(sτ | πo) ln p(oτ | C).

= X 

> oτ,s τ

p(oτ | sτ ) q(sτ | πo)



ln q(oτ | πo)

p(oτ | C)



− X 

> oτ,s τ

p(oτ | sτ ) q(sτ | πo) ln p(oτ | sτ ).

Then, we marginalize sτ from the first term such that P 

> sτ

q(sτ | πo) p(oτ | sτ ) = P 

> sτ

q(oτ , s τ |

πo) = q(oτ | πo) and separate the sum in the second term to factorize in terms of the the conditional entropy such that Hp(oτ | sτ ) = − P 

> oτ

p(oτ | sτ ) ln[ p(oτ | sτ )] to reach: 

G(τ, π o) = X

> oτ

q(oτ | πo) ln q(oτ | πo)

p(oτ | C) + X

> sτ

q(sτ | πo) Hp(oτ | sτ )

= DKL 

q(oτ | πo) ∥ p(oτ | C)| {z }

> risk

+ Eq(sτ |πo)

H p(oτ | sτ ) | {z }

> ambiguity

.

APPENDIX CPROOF OF COROLLARY 1Following a similar derivation as in (7)–(9) to find the optimal posterior for states s1: t, the optimal posterior for policies π ∈ Π can be reached to be: 

ln q∗(π) ∝ ln p(π) + Eq(s1: T )

 ln p(o1: T , s 1: T | π). (47) 50 

Furthermore, splitting the time horizon at current time instant t and factorizing the joint distri-bution gives: 

Eq(s1: T )

 ln p(o1: T , s 1: T | π) = Eq(s1: T )

 ln p(o1: t, s 1: t | π) + Eq(s1: T )

 ln p(ot+1: T , s t+1: T | s1: t, π )

(48) Then, we simplify the expectation in the first term as it only depends on s1: t. Furthermore, averaging over past time instants before t will marginalize s1: t from the second term. Similar to (1), we treat ot+1: T as random variables and that can be introduced into the expectation. Thus, (48) is transformed into: 

Eq(s1: T )

 ln p(o1: T , s 1: T | π) = Eq(s1: t)[ln p(o1: t, s 1: t | π)] 

| {z }

> past + present

+ Eq(st+1: T ,o t+1: T )[ln p(ot+1: T , s t+1: T | π)] 

| {z }

> future

.

(49) Here, the first term in (49) depends on past instants τ < t when the AI agent is committed to policy πo after convergence during training. In addition, we recall that the VFE is considered equal for all policies at current time t. Hence, we can safely drop the first term in (49) in the comparison between policies. Moreover, we can rearrange the EFE in (1) to express the second term in (49) in terms of the time instants τ > t as: 

Eq(st+1: T ,o t+1: T )[ln p(ot+1: T , s t+1: T | π)] = −G(π) + Eq(st+1: T )[ln q(st+1: T )] . (50) Here, q(st+1: T ) is fixed when performing the coordinate-ascent update for q(π). Accordingly, 

Eq(st+1: T )[ln q(st+1: T )] is considered to be a constant term as it does not depend on π and is later absorbed in the normalization of q(π). Therefore, after substituting (50) back in (47), we can reach that: ln q∗(π) ∝ ln p(π) − G(π). While noting that the AI agent has no prior preferences over the policies π ∈ Π nor develops any habitual behavior which can favor an alternative policy over another, then we can assume that p(π) is uniform i.e., all policies are equally likely a priori. In this case, we can simplify it further to become ln q∗(π) ∝ − G(π).

APPENDIX DPROOF OF LEMMA 2Consider the Fokker–Planck equation governing the density p(x, t ) under drift f (x) and diffusion Γ:

∂p (x, t )

∂t = −∇ · [f (x)p(x, t )] + ∇ · Γ∇p(x, t ).51 

At steady state, we have ∂p (x, t )

∂t = 0 . This yields the divergence: 

∇ ·  f (x)p∗(x) − Γ∇p∗(x)

| {z }

> J(x)

 = 0 , (51) where J(x) = f (x)p∗(x) − Γ∇p∗(x) is the stationary flux (i.e., probability current) at NESS. Dividing J(x) by p∗(x) and rearranging to isolate f (x) gives: 

f (x) = J(x)

p∗(x) + Γ ∇ ln p∗(x). (52) Considering both (51) and (52), it is clear that the normalized flux J(x) 

> p∗(x)

is divergence free. Then, by applying the Helmholtz decomposition, this divergence-free field can be written as a skew-symmetric operator R acting on the gradient of the Lagrangian L(x) of the NESS system, i.e., 

J(x)

p∗(x) = R∇L(x), (53) where R⊤ = −R. By considering that L(x) = − ln p∗(x) and replacing (53) back in (52), the decomposition reaches its final form as: 

f (x) = −Γ∇L(x) + R∇L(x) = ( R − Γ) ∇L(x) = (Γ − R)∇ ln p∗(x).

Thus, the lemma is proved. REFERENCES 

[1] W. Saad, O. Hashash, C. K. Thomas, C. Chaccour, M. Debbah, N. Mandayam, and Z. Han, “Artificial general intelligence (AGI)-native wireless systems: A journey beyond 6G,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 113, no. 9, pp. 849–887, 2025. [2] J. Ding and M. Liedtke, “Waymos blocked roads and caused chaos during San Francisco power outage,” https://fortune.com/ 2025/12/22/waymo-ai-san-francisco-power-outage-operational-management-failure-software/, December 2025, associated Press, December 22, 2025. [3] D. Ha and J. Schmidhuber, “World models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , vol. 2, no. 3, p. 440, 2018. [4] D. Kahneman, Thinking, fast and slow . macmillan, 2011. [5] Y. LeCun, “A path towards autonomous machine intelligence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27,” Open Review , vol. 62, 2022. [6] R. P. Rao and D. H. Ballard, “Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects,” Nature neuroscience , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 79–87, 1999. [7] K. Friston, T. FitzGerald, F. Rigoli, P. Schwartenbeck, and G. Pezzulo, “Active inference: a process theory,” Neural computation , vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 1–49, 2017. [8] A. Goldbeter, “Dissipative structures in biological systems: bistability, oscillations, spatial patterns and waves,” Philosoph-ical transactions. Series A, Mathematical, physical, and engineering sciences , vol. 376, no. 2124, p. 20170376, 2018. [9] B. de Vries, “Active inference for physical AI agents–an engineering perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.20927 , 2026. [10] K. Friston, “Life as we know it,” Journal of the royal society interface , vol. 10, no. 86, p. 20130475, 2013. 52 

[11] G. Dulac-Arnold, N. Levine, D. J. Mankowitz, J. Li, C. Paduraru, S. Gowal, and T. Hester, “Challenges of real-world reinforcement learning: definitions, benchmarks and analysis,” Machine Learning , vol. 110, no. 9, pp. 2419–2468, 2021. [12] OpenAI, “GPT-5,” https://openai.com/, 2025. [13] M. Assran, A. Bardes, D. Fan, Q. Garrido, R. Howes, M. Muckley, A. Rizvi, C. Roberts, K. Sinha, A. Zholus et al. , “V-JEPA 2: Self-supervised video models enable understanding, prediction and planning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09985 ,2025. [14] Y. Yang, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, S. Zhou, R. Tan, J. Yang, Y. Du, and C. Gan, “Mindjourney: Test-time scaling with world models for spatial reasoning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 38, pp. 109 855–109 885, 2026. [15] Physical Intelligence, “π0.7: a steerable generalist robotic foundation model with emergent capabilities,” Physical Intelligence, Tech. Rep., 2026. [Online]. Available: https://pi.website/pi07 [16] L. Mur-Labadia, M. Muckley, A. Bar, M. Assran, K. Sinha, M. Rabbat, Y. LeCun, N. Ballas, and A. Bardes, “V-JEPA 2.1: Unlocking dense features in video self-supervised learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.14482 , 2026. [17] M. Kirchhoff, T. Parr, E. Palacios, K. Friston, and J. Kiverstein, “The markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle,” Journal of The royal society interface , vol. 15, no. 138, p. 20170792, 2018. [18] W. Schultz, P. Dayan, and P. R. Montague, “A neural substrate of prediction and reward,” Science , vol. 275, no. 5306, pp. 1593–1599, 1997. [19] J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, D. Casas, L. A. Hendricks, J. Welbl, A. Clark 

et al. , “Training compute-optimal large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556 , vol. 10, 2022. [20] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess, R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and D. Amodei, “Scaling laws for neural language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020. [21] C. Snell, J. Lee, K. Xu, and A. Kumar, “Scaling LLM test-time compute optimally can be more effective than scaling model parameters,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314 , 2024. [22] B. Sch¨ olkopf, F. Locatello, S. Bauer, N. R. Ke, N. Kalchbrenner, A. Goyal, and Y. Bengio, “Toward causal representation learning,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 612–634, 2021. [23] C. K. Thomas, O. Hashash, and W. Saad, “From passive mirrors to active agents: Holonic digital twins for physical artificial intelligence over networks,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine , 2026. [24] J. Richens and T. Everitt, “Robust agents learn causal world models,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [25] L. Itti and P. Baldi, “Bayesian surprise attracts human attention,” Vision research , vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1295–1306, 2009. [26] K. Friston, “The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?” Nature reviews neuroscience , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 127–138, 2010. [27] T. Parr, G. Pezzulo, and K. J. Friston, Active inference: the free energy principle in mind, brain, and behavior . MIT Press, 2022. [28] K. Friston, L. Da Costa, D. A. Sakthivadivel, C. Heins, G. A. Pavliotis, M. Ramstead, and T. Parr, “Path integrals, particular kinds, and strange things,” Physics of Life Reviews , vol. 47, pp. 35–62, 2023. [29] P. Schwartenbeck, T. H. FitzGerald, C. Mathys, R. Dolan, M. Kronbichler, and K. Friston, “Evidence for surprise minimization over value maximization in choice behavior,” Scientific reports , vol. 5, no. 1, p. 16575, 2015. [30] J. Pearl, Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference . Elsevier, 2014. [31] B. Jacobs, “The mathematics of changing one’s mind, via jeffrey’s or via pearl’s update rule,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , vol. 65, pp. 783–806, 2019. [32] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2018. 53 

[33] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski et al. , “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” nature , vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015. [34] Y. Chandak, G. Theocharous, S. Shankar, M. White, S. Mahadevan, and P. Thomas, “Optimizing for the future in non-stationary mdps,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 1414–1425. [35] Y. LeCun, S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, M. Ranzato, F. Huang et al. , “A tutorial on energy-based learning,” Predicting structured data , vol. 1, no. 0, 2006. [36] M. I. Jordan, Z. Ghahramani, T. S. Jaakkola, and L. K. Saul, “An introduction to variational methods for graphical models,” 

Machine learning , vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 183–233, 1999. [37] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, “Graphical models, exponential families, and variational inference,” Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning , vol. 1, no. 1-2, pp. 1–305, 2008. [38] J. Winn, C. M. Bishop, and T. Jaakkola, “Variational message passing.” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 6, no. 4, 2005. [39] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. [40] R. Smith, K. J. Friston, and C. J. Whyte, “A step-by-step tutorial on active inference and its application to empirical data,” 

Journal of mathematical psychology , vol. 107, p. 102632, 2022. [41] G. D. Forney, “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 520–548, 2001. [42] C. M. Bishop and N. M. Nasrabadi, Pattern recognition and machine learning . Springer, 2006, vol. 4, no. 4. [43] B. Millidge, A. Tschantz, and C. L. Buckley, “Whence the expected free energy?” Neural Computation , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 447–482, 2021. [44] D. Koller and N. Friedman, Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques . MIT press, 2009. [45] L. Da Costa, K. Friston, C. Heins, and G. A. Pavliotis, “Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes,” Proceedings. Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences , vol. 477, no. 2256, p. 20210518, 2021. [46] E. R. Palacios, A. Razi, T. Parr, M. Kirchhoff, and K. Friston, “On markov blankets and hierarchical self-organisation,” 

Journal of theoretical biology , vol. 486, p. 110089, 2020. [47] G. Kaniadakis and D. T. Hristopulos, “Nonlinear kinetics on lattices based on the kinetic interaction principle,” Entropy ,vol. 20, no. 6, p. 426, 2018. [48] K. Friston, B. Sengupta, and G. Auletta, “Cognitive dynamics: From attractors to active inference,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 102, no. 4, pp. 427–445, 2014. [49] D. Silver and R. S. Sutton, “Welcome to the era of experience,” Google AI , vol. 1, p. 11, 2025. [50] L. Da Costa, T. Parr, N. Sajid, S. Veselic, V. Neacsu, and K. Friston, “Active inference on discrete state-spaces: A synthesis,” 

Journal of Mathematical Psychology , vol. 99, p. 102447, 2020. [51] E. Dupoux, Y. LeCun, and J. Malik, “Why AI systems don’t learn and what to do about it: Lessons on autonomous learning from cognitive science,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.15381 , 2026. [52] O. Hashash, C. Chaccour, and W. Saad, “Edge continual learning for dynamic digital twins over wireless networks,” in 

Proc. of the IEEE 23rd International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communication (SPAWC) ,Oulu, Finland, Jul. 2022, pp. 1–5. [53] R. Bogacz, E.-J. Wagenmakers, B. U. Forstmann, and S. Nieuwenhuis, “The neural basis of the speed–accuracy tradeoff,” 

Trends in neurosciences , vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 10–16, 2010.