Title: AI Coaching for Accelerating Human Skill Development with Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25337v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 00:29:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# AI Coaching for Accelerating Human Skill Development with Reinforcement Learning 

Wei Wang 1 Enlin Gu 1 Antonio Loquercio 1 Haimin Hu †1,2 Rahul Mangharam †11University of Pennsylvania 2Johns Hopkins University 

{wang100,guenlin,aloque,rahulm }@engineering.upenn.edu , haimin@cs.jhu.edu 

Figure 1: Our AI coach accelerates human motor-skill development through strategic scaffolding and stepping back. Left: We train the AI coach using RL by augmenting a physics simulator with a learner action model, a probabilistic automaton governing skill evolution, and a pretrained expert policy. Center: The AI coach adaptively blends the expert action with the learner’s command to produce an executed action a. Right: In live coaching of FPV drone racing, the AI maintains a belief b(θ) over the learner’s latent skill and conveys feedback through multimodal channels, including shared control, audio instructions, and visual cues. 

Abstract: AI copilots can substantially boost human performance through shared control, but excessive assistance can induce over-reliance and skill atrophy. This paper studies how an embodied AI agent can act as a coach that accelerates human motor-skill development. We argue that effective coaching requires strategic scaf-folding and stepping back that are aligned with the learner’s capability, allowing productive failures that drive learning. We formalize the interactive AI coaching process as a non-cooperative dynamic game in which the learner optimizes task performance while the coach targets the learner’s independent competence. Build-ing on this formalism, we develop a reinforcement learning framework combining adaptive shared control with probabilistic models of the coach’s causal influence on skill evolution, enabling tractable training of coaching policies. A compre-hensive user study ( N = 33 ) on first-person-view drone racing shows significant gains in human learning outcomes over state-of-the-art AI coaching baselines. 

Keywords: AI Coaching, Reinforcement Learning, Human–Robot Interaction 

# 1 Introduction 

Mastering a motor skill, from racing a car at the limit, to piloting a drone through tight gates, requires deliberate practice at the boundary of one’s current ability. Human coaches accelerate this process not by performing the task for the learner, but by orchestrating the right challenges at the right moments [1, 2]. Can an embodied AI agent assume this role?  

> †

Equal advising. Project webpage: https://ai-coaching-drone-racing.github.io/   

> arXiv:2606.25337v1 [cs.RO] 24 Jun 2026 Figure 2: Learning to Coach (L2C) accelerates human skill development. Example pre- and post-coaching trajectories under three coaching methods. The flag marks the start and finish line, the crosses mark failures, and arrows above each gate indicate the flight direction. After just 40 minutes of training, our L2C coach reduced lap time by 27.9% on average, substantially outperforming both baselines (RBF: 11.3 %, MIA: 6.2 %).

Recent advances in robot learning have produced embodied AI agents that can outperform world champions [3, 4]. A natural use of such expert AI is as a shared-control copilot : a system that fuses the human’s commands with the AI’s corrective inputs to keep the team performing well despite human error [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. This is the dominant paradigm in modern human–AI collaboration, where AI acts as a “guardian angel” that prevents failures and smooths execution. However, helping humans succeed now is fundamentally different from helping them succeed alone in the future. Per-sistent AI assistance can induce over-reliance and skill stagnation in human users [10, 11], depriving them of the productive failures [1] that drive skill development and retention. This is also a phe-nomenon that recent AI safety work characterizes more broadly as gradual disempowerment [12]. Conversely, a coach that withdraws assistance indiscriminately exposes the learner to failures that are uninformative or frustrating, neither of which benefits human skill learning. 

Contributions. Our key insight is that an effective AI coach must neither overprotect nor disengage from the learner; it should strategically step back when doing so turns mistakes into catalysts of long-term independent competence. We formalize this through the Human–AI Coaching Game , a novel class of non-cooperative dynamic games in which a learner optimizes task performance while a coach targets the learner’s long-term independent competence. We develop a reinforcement learning framework combining an adaptive, closed-loop shared control rule, a probabilistic automaton that captures the coach’s causal influence on learner skill, and a tractable skill-improvement reward for scalable coaching policy training. We deploy our AI coach in a user study ( N = 33 ) of first-person view (FPV) drone racing with a high-fidelity simulator, demonstrating significant gains in human learning (reduced lap times and failure counts) over state-of-the-art AI coaches. To our knowledge, this is the first theory and algorithm that explicitly treat human motor-skill development as the main objective of AI agents, thereby transforming them from passive guardians into personalized mentors. 

Related Work. As embodied AI agents become more capable, they have been increasingly deployed to assist humans in challenging tasks, from drone piloting [5, 13] to high-speed car racing [6, 8], through shared control : AI augments human commands with its corrective inputs. While effective at enhancing task performance, recent work has shown that persistent AI assistance may induce over-reliance, leaving the human’s skill stagnant or degraded [10, 11, 12]. A growing line of research thus asks whether AI can act as a mentor that empowers humans to develop and retain skills they can exercise independently. Closest to our work is Shen et al. [14], 2which gradually decays the assistance level in shared control to reduce learner over-reliance. While conceptually similar to our productive-failure idea, it fades assistance on a fixed rule agnostic to both learner skill and physical context. Z-COACH [7] uses shared autonomy to identify which sub-skills lie within the learner’s Zone of Proximal Development [15], but assumes a fixed assistance level and focuses on curriculum design rather than synthesizing a coaching strategy that accelerates human learning on a given task. Our work differs from these by closing the loop on both the learner’s evolving skill and the runtime physical context, learning a coaching policy that adaptively decides when to scaffold and when to step back, and naturally complements curriculum-design approaches. Belief-space dynamic games [16, 17, 18] provide a general mathematical framework for human– robot interaction, in which a robot acts under uncertainty about latent human states such as intent, preferences, or skill. A widely studied cooperative variant of belief game is Assistance Games [19, 20, 21, 22], in which a robot learns and acts on the human’s latent objective to better assist the human. To date, however, this framework has been used almost exclusively for humans teaching robots , not the other way around. We extend belief-space dynamic games to AI coaching by introducing a novel 

non-cooperative game that captures the AI’s fundamental role as a mentor for long-term human skill development rather than solely maximizing the task performance. 

# 2 Formalism: The Human–AI Coaching Game 

Motivation: The Dilemma in Coaching. Consider an AI coach helping a learner practice a motor skill, e.g., flying a racing drone through gates (Figure 1). At each moment, the coach must decide how much it scaffolds the learner toward task completion, or steps back to let them struggle, fail, and learn. This decision raises a dilemma: intervening aggressively risks coddling , leaving the learner over-reliant on AI; withdrawing too early yields uninformative failures and frustration. Moreover, the learner’s true skill is never directly observed and must be inferred from behavior as it evolves. 

Human–AI Coaching Game. Formally, we cast the AI coaching problem as a two-player partially observable stochastic game (POSG) [23], which we refer to as a Human–AI Coaching Game . We argue that coaching is fundamentally a non-cooperative game [24] where the human and AI have different objectives: the learner seeks to maximize the task performance, while the coach optimizes a pedagogical objective, namely the learner’s independent competence. These distinct incentives are critical for coaching success. The pedagogical reward encourages the coach to proactively modulate assistance (e.g., scaffolding or stepping back) when doing so accelerates long-term human skill development, even at the cost of short-term task performance. 

Definition 1. A Coaching Game is a two-player POSG between a human learner L and an AI coach C, defined by the tuple G =  S, A, T, Θ, OL, OC , g L, g C , r L, r C , P 0, γ , where: 

S is the set of physical states: s ∈ S ;

A is the action set shared by the learner and the coach: aL, a C ∈ A ;

Θ ⊂ [0 , 1] is a finite, totally ordered set of latent skill levels: θ ∈ Θ, with θ = 0 denoting lowest proficiency and θ = 1 expert-level mastery; 

T (s′, θ ′ | s, θ, a L, a C ) is the joint state–skill transition distribution; 

OL, OC are the observation sets for the learner and coach: oL ∈ O L, o C ∈ O C ;

gL(s), g C (s, a L) are the observation functions; 

rL(s, a L, a C ) is the learner’s reward measuring task performance; 

rC (s, θ ) is the coach’s reward, measuring the learner’s capacity for independent perfor-mance (defined formally below); 

P0(s, θ ) is the joint initial distribution over states and latent skill; 

γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor. 

In a Coaching Game , the learner is boundedly rational [25]: the skill level θ is a capability con-straint that determines the learner’s policy class πL(· | oL; θ). That is, although all learners seek 3to maximize the same reward rL, a beginner and an expert execute different policies to achieve a proficiency permitted by θ. We describe a practical instantiation of this bounded-rationality model in Section 3. The joint transition T (s′, θ ′ | s, θ, a L, a C ) captures how the physical states evolve and, critically, how the coach’s actions causally influence the learner’s skill progression; we model the latter using a probabilistic automaton model introduced in the next section. It is also worth noting that the game’s information structure is one-sided: the only private information is the learner’s latent skill θ, which is unknown to the coach but governs the learner’s behavior. The coach therefore main-tains a belief bt ∈ ∆Θ over θ, updated via runtime inference from observed learner behavior. The coach’s reward should depend on how well the learner would perform alone , which in turn depends on the learner’s evolving skill θ. We formalize this next. 

Learner Reward: Assisted Task Performance. The learner’s objective is a task reward collected under the combined effect of their own actions and the coach’s intervention: rL(st, a Lt , a Ct ) = 

rtask (st, a t), where at is the executed action obtained by combining the learner’s and coach’s actions through a blending rule; we introduce a specific choice in (2). This reward captures the learner’s 

pragmatic incentive: they are happy to lean on the coach and accept more help in exchange for better task performance. The coach, however, is graded on a different, pedagogical exam: not how well the learner performs now with help, but how well they will perform later without it. 

Coach Reward: Value of Independence (VoI). VoI scores a state by the learner’s expected return when they continue acting from that state without any AI assistance :

rC (st; θt) = E

" ∞X

> k=0

γk rtask (st+k, a Lt+k) aLt+k ∼ πL(· | oLt+k; θt+k),

¯st+k+1 ∼ T (· | ¯st+k, a Lt+k, a Ct+k = 0) 

#

, (1) where ¯s := ( s, θ ). Intuitively, VoI asks: “If the coach were to walk away right now, how well would the learner perform?” A coach that maximizes VoI is rewarded not for making the learner’s performance look good with assistance, but for enabling the learner to succeed independently .

# 3 Learning to Coach: RL for Accelerating Human Skill Development 

In this section, we build on the Coaching Game formalism to develop a scalable coaching policy training and deployment pipeline, which we refer to as Learning to Coach (L2C) .

Computational Challenges. The Coaching Game is non-trivial to solve for three reasons. First, it inherits the intractability of general POSGs [26]. One might hope to sidestep this by cast-ing the Coaching Game as an Assistance Game [19, 20, 21], in which the one-sided private-information structure admits a reduction to a single-agent partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) and for which scalable solution methods have recently emerged [22]. However, Assistance Games require an identical, shared reward between two collaborating agents, whereas the Coaching Game is non-cooperative by construction. Second, the VoI reward (1) asks what 

would happen if the coach walked away. Therefore, it is a counterfactual quantity that diverges from the on-policy training trajectory and is expensive to estimate. Third, the coach’s influence on the learner’s skill is indirect : the coach acts through shared control to modify the executed trajectory, while the learner’s skill θ updates in response to the resulting task outcomes (e.g., success or failure), not necessarily to the coach’s action directly. A standard physics simulator can roll out transition 

T (s′ | s, a ) but says nothing about how task outcomes affect human skill change. 

Overview of Technical Contributions. Our key insight is that the learner’s behavior is largely gov-erned by their skill level θ through the skill-conditioned policy πL(· | oL; θ). This allows us to fold the learner’s policy into the environment dynamics and capture the causal effect of coaching actions on skill progression using a probabilistic finite-state automaton, effectively reducing the two-player game to a POMDP amenable to model-free reinforcement learning (RL). Building on this insight, our contributions are threefold: (i) a closed-loop blending rule that adapts the assistance level λ to the coach’s observations of both the physical environment and the learner behavior; (ii) a reformu-lation of the Coaching Game to a single-agent POMDP, solvable via RL, through a probabilistic 4model of the coach’s causal influence on learner skill; and (iii) a tractable surrogate reward that is provably consistent with the counterfactual VoI objective. 

Closed-Loop Blending for Adaptive Coaching. The AI coach implements shared control by fusing the learner’s action with an expert baseline via a linear blending rule: 

a = λ ⊙ π∗(oC ) + ( 1 − λ) ⊙ aL, (2) where λ = πCλ (oC ) ∈ [0 , 1] dim( A) is a per-axis blending vector that modulates the coach’s assistance level, from 0 (no assistance) to 1 (full override), π∗(oC ) is a pretrained expert policy that performs the task at a high level of proficiency, and ⊙ denotes element-wise product. Linear blending of learner and expert commands is standard in shared control [6, 7, 14]; our formulation extends it to offer three advantages in coaching. First, the per-dimension blending vector λ enables more flexible coaching along each independent control axis. Second, anchoring on a pretrained expert baseline 

π∗ decouples task competence from coaching strategy: the coach only learns to modulate assistance 

rather than synthesize full control from scratch, a deliberate design choice that we expect to reduce training difficulty compared to learning a monolithic policy end-to-end. For the motor-skill domains we target (e.g., FPV drone racing), expert policies are readily obtained via performance-oriented deep RL [4, 3, 27]. Third, unlike prior work that modulates assistance according to a fixed rule with little to no dependence on the runtime physical context [7, 14], our blending factor is observation-dependent and adapts in real time to both the physical environment and the learner’s action. To our knowledge, this is the first formulation in which the coaching strategy closes the loop on runtime physical context, enabling spatially and behaviorally targeted interventions.  

> Figure 3: Hybrid PFA for simulating skill change triggered by success or failure events.

Simulating Human Skill Change Due to Coaching. To train a coaching policy, we augment the robot’s tran-sition dynamics with two learner-side components: askill-conditioned control policy, and a model of how the learner’s latent skill θ evolves in response to coaching events such as successful or failed task attempts, effec-tively turning the Coaching Game into a single-agent POMDP. Given an expert value function Q∗(oL, a ), we model learners of different skill as Boltzmann noisily-rational [28] decision-makers whose action variance shrinks with proficiency: 

πL(aL | oL; θ) ∝ exp  β(θ) · Q∗(oL, a L) , (3) where the rationality coefficient β(θ) increases monotonically in θ: a simulated novice learner sam-ples actions near-uniformly over the action set, while more skilled learners concentrate their actions more sharply around a∗ = argmax a Q∗(oL, a ). For a bounded action set A, we use the standard Laplace expansion [29] to approximate (3) by a Gaussian centered at a∗ and truncated to A. Our framework is designed to be modular with respect to the learner model: it only requires that the learner be modeled by a θ-parameterized policy class πL(· | oL; θ). Accurately modeling skill-conditioned learner behaviors remains an open problem, and we want our framework to benefit from future progress on it without having to redesign the algorithmic framework. The Boltzmann model (3) used in our experiments is one tractable choice that is simple and interpretable. Many alternatives could be plugged into the same training pipeline, including behavior cloning [30], ficti-tious co-play [6], dynamic games [21, 31], inverse games [32, 33], and mix of policies [34, 22]. Next, we need a model that captures the coach’s causal influence on the learner’s skill evolution through task outcomes. To this end, we propose to model the learner’s skill change as probabilistic transitions triggered by success and failure events, similar to the human-adaptation framework of Nikolaidis et al. [35]. We leverage a hybrid probabilistic finite-state automaton (PFA) model (Fig-ure 3) that operates in two modes governed by the performance index It(ht), a measure of human learning progress, where ht = ( st, a Lt , s t−1, a Lt−1, . . . ) is the history of states and human actions. A natural choice is the cumulative task reward over a horizon: It(ht) = PT −1 

> k=0

rtask (st−k, a Lt−k).5The learner is deemed to have failed if It < ϵ for a prescribed threshold ϵ, set semantically (e.g., causing a collision) or calibrated from a pilot study. When the learner succeeds ( It ≥ ϵ), they upskill with probability αS (θ), downskill with probability βS (θ), or remain unchanged otherwise. When the learner fails ( It < ϵ ), they upskill with probability αF (θ). Each rate is governed by a sigmoid in θ parameterized by a slope and offset with pedagogically meaningful trends: αS (θ) is highest for novices (small wins matter most early on), βS (θ) decreases with θ (skill becomes harder to lose once consolidated), and αF (θ) grows with θ (skilled learners extract more from their mistakes). To cover a diverse learner population, we randomize the sigmoid parameters at the start of each training episode to generalize the coaching policy across learners with different learning capabilities. 

Training a Coaching Policy with Model-Free Reinforcement Learning. We train the coach-ing policy πCλ using proximal policy optimization (PPO) [36], leveraging privileged access to the learner’s skill level θ in simulation. The skill level is included in the observation, and we use a tractable surrogate reward rCt = θt − θt−1 in place of the counterfactual VoI reward (1). At deployment, the coach maintains an estimate ˆθ based on belief bt recursively updated us-ing runtime inference. We now show that optimizing skill directly is sufficient for optimizing VoI. Note that maximizing cumulative skill improvement can help reduce variance and, via tele-scoping, is equivalent to maximizing skill levels up to a positive affine transformation. For any physical state s ∈ S and skill level θ ∈ Θ, define the learner’s independent continuation value 

as V ind (s, θ ) ≜ E

hP∞ 

> k=0

γk rtask (st+k, a Lt+k) st = s, θ t = θ, a Ct+k ≡ 0, ∀k ≥ 0

i

. Fixing a policy-independent evaluation distribution peval ∈ ∆( S), we define the evaluation-averaged VoI 

as ¯rC (θ) ≜ Es∼peval 

V ind (s, θ ). The following result provides a formal bridge between the 

training-time use of privileged skill information and the deployment-time objective of maximizing the learner’s independent performance; the proof can be found in Appendix D. 

Proposition 1 (Skill dominance implies VoI dominance) . Suppose ¯rC (θ) is nondecreasing in skill 

θ. If, at every skill level, policy πC makes the learner at least as likely to upskill (i.e., increase θ) in the next step as ˜πC does, then EπC

P ∞ 

> t=0

γt ¯rC (θt) ≥ E˜πC

P ∞ 

> t=0

γt ¯rC (θt) .

Proposition 1 shows that, if a coaching policy πC is able to increase the learner’s upskill probability, it also dominates on the evaluation-averaged VoI return EπC

P ∞ 

> t=0

γt ¯rC (θt). The state-averaging through peval is necessary because different coaching policies may induce different physical state trajectories; ¯rC (θ) therefore decouples the coach’s VoI objective from the policy-induced state dis-tribution. For example, in our FPV drone racing deployment to be introduced next, peval corresponds to the distribution of starting states in unassisted evaluation laps. The training simulator comprises four modules (see Figure 1 left): a physics simulator that advances physical states given the blended human and AI actions, a skill dynamics module that evolves θ via the hybrid PFA (Figure 3), a learner behavior module that samples aL from the skill-conditioned Boltzmann policy (3), and an expert policy π∗(oC ). Each training episode terminates when an upskill event occurs. The training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Deployment: A Case Study in Coaching FPV Drone Racing. We apply L2C to FPV drone racing [4] as an illustrative example, where the learner pilots a quadrotor through a sequence of gates via a remote controller (Figure 1 right). At deployment, the AI coach operates through three key components. (i) Assistance modalities: The coach executes shared control through the blending rule (2), and augments it with multimodal feedback channels such as verbal instructions and visual cues indicating the error between the expert and the learner’s current control. (ii) Runtime skill inference: Since θ is unobservable at deployment, the coach maintains a belief bt over θ, which yields an online estimate ˆθ and is updated via Bayesian inference b+(θ) ∝ P (oC | θ)b(θ). In our drone racing setting, we partition the track into per-gate segments and maintain an independent belief bℓt over the learner’s skill at each gate ℓ; the per-gate likelihood P (oC | θℓ) is a Gaussian on the realized segment passage time, centered at a skill-dependent target time τ ℓ

> tgt

(θℓ) calibrated from a pilot study. Under this likelihood model, faster passages shift belief mass toward higher skill, slower passages toward lower. Alternative skill inference schemes include Bayesian Knowledge Tracing [37, 38], which typically requires offline model fitting from massive human data. (iii) 

6Figure 4: After coaching, learners trained with our L2C coach show significant reductions in lap time and failure count (left) and report higher safety, performance, agency, and satisfaction than both baselines (right). 

Structured training loop: The coach provides continuous assistance via (2) in the normal mode; upon failure ( I < ϵ ), it resets the environment and asks the learner to re-attempt the failed segment under guided practice. In our drone racing setting, the reset position is one gate before the failed segment, giving the learner room to re-enter the segment with appropriate momentum. Design details of the coaching system can be found in Appendix B. 

# 4 Experimental Results 

In this section, we present experimental results demonstrating the effectiveness of our L2C coach and its superiority over state-of-the-art baselines. We conducted a user study with N = 33 participants from diverse drone-flying backgrounds in a high-fidelity FPV drone racing simulator that we built on top of Pasumarti et al. [27] and Isaac Lab [39]. We structure each trial into three phases: a pre-and post-coaching test (2 laps each), and a main coached training session. To prevent participant fatigue, we limit the training session to 15 laps (around 40 minutes) and restrict the human’s control authority to yaw and roll rate while automating the pitch rate and thrust. Simulation and user study details can be found in Section A.1 and Section C, respectively. 

Baselines and Metrics. Each participant was randomly assigned to one of three AI coaches: L2C and two baselines: Rule-based Fading (RBF) [14]—a recently proposed AI coaching scheme that gradually fades the assistance level over the training session following a fixed curve and modulation rule agnostic to learner skill and physical context, and Minimally-invasive Assistance (MIA)—an RL-based AI copilot, following human-centered safety filters [8], that minimally modifies the learner action to achieve safety and task completion. To ensure a fair comparison, L2C and MIA use the same expert policy π∗; MIA is calibrated so that its behavior in absence of human input matches that of π∗. All three methods use the same language instructions and visual cues as additional coaching modalities (see details in Section B). Based on self-reported drone-operating experience measured on a five-point scale, we found no statistically significant differences in initial skill levels across the three groups. We measure human skill change with two metrics: lap time and failure count (collisions and timeouts; a gate must be passed within 8 seconds). We further collect subjective evaluations of the coaching experience via a post-trial questionnaire. 

Hypotheses. We structure our main results around the following hypotheses: 

H1: L2C reliably improves the learner’s performance in both lap time and failure count. 

H2: Neither baseline replicates L2C’s dual improvement. 

H3: L2C produces larger mean improvements than each baseline on both outcomes. 

Results. For L2C, a paired-samples t-test comparing pre- and post-coaching lap times yielded a mean reduction of 27.9% with p = 0 .005 and Cohen’s dz = −1.08 (large). Similarly, a paired 

t-test on per-lap failure count yielded a mean reduction of 3.52 failures per lap with p < 0.001 and Cohen’s dz = −2.13 (very large). For RBF, paired tests showed no reliable change in either lap time (mean reduction 11.3% with p = 0 .21 and dz = −0.41 ), but the paired test on failure count 7Figure 5: L2C adjusts assistance based on estimated skill ˆθ and physical context. Left: ˆθ = 0 . Right: ˆθ = 0 .5.

showed significance (mean reduction 2 failures per lap with p = 0 .027 , dz = −0.78 ) at roughly one-third the magnitude of L2C’s effect. For MIA, paired tests showed no reliable change in either lap time (mean reduction 6.2% with p = 0 .62 and dz = −0.15 ) or failure count (mean reduction 1.11 failures per lap with p = 0 .38 and dz = −0.28 ). Those results validate H1 and H2 .We further ran Welch’s two-sample t-tests with Holm correction applied within each outcome. On lap time, L2C outperformed MIA ( ∆ = −21 .7 %, Hedges’ g = −0.63 ) and RBF ( ∆ = −16 .6 %, 

g = −0.60 ); on failure count, L2C outperformed MIA ( ∆ = −2.41 failures per lap, g = −0.76 ) and RBF ( ∆ = −1.52 failures per lap, g = −0.67 ). All four contrasts favor L2C with medium-to-large effect sizes between 0.60 and 0.76 and p-values between 0.09 and 0.16 (expected given the sample-size limit at n = 11 per group; L2C is also the only method to reach within-subject significance on both outcomes). This result supports H3 .The objective metrics in Figure 4 show that L2C achieves larger reductions in lap time and failure count than both baselines. On the post-trial questionnaire, L2C also received higher subjective rat-ings than both baselines on safety (“Compared to my first race, I flew more safely in the final race.”) and performance (“I believe my overall drone racing performance has improved since my first race.”) than both baselines, consistent with its objective improvements. Higher agency (reverse-coded from “The AI coach intervened too much throughout the race.”) and satisfaction (“Overall, I am happy with how the training went.”) ratings further suggest that adaptive coaching preserves user control and improves the perceived training experience. Figure 2 provides qualitative examples of how hu-man trajectories change after coaching, complementing aggregate metrics in Figure 4. Finally, in Figure 5, we inspect how L2C modulates assistance based on the estimated learner skill ˆθ ∈ [0 , 1] 

and physical context. The magnitude of blending vector λ = πCλ (oC ) along example trajectories shows two emerging forms of adaptation: across learners, a novice ( ˆθ = 0 , left) receives more assis-tance than a more skilled learner ( ˆθ = 0 .5, right); within each trajectory, |λ| varies sharply around the gates, the task-critical states that determine whether the learner collides or passes successfully. 

# 5 Conclusions 

Limitations and Future Work. While our results demonstrate the promise of learning-based AI coaching, we acknowledge several limitations and outline directions for future work. Although our PFA appeared to be sufficient for modeling learner behaviors in drone racing, the simulated learners may not capture the full variability of real human learning in more complex motor-skill training settings. Future work could explore data-driven alternatives such as behavior cloning [30], world models [6], or mix of policies [34, 22]. Our current system learns only the assistance modulation of physical control, while verbal and visual cues are predefined and triggered by fixed rules. Future work could jointly optimize a multimodal coaching policy with a foundation-model backbone. 

Summary. As AI systems grow more capable, the question is no longer whether they can replace human skill, but how they can help build it. We have argued, and shown empirically, that optimizing for independent human competence gives both a principled definition of human-empowering AI and a practical recipe for building one. Our game-informed RL framework produces a coach that mea-surably accelerates human skill development in a comprehensive drone racing user study. The same principle matters far beyond motor-skill training. Coding agents, in particular, are currently opti-mized for task performance, with no explicit incentive for what the human retains. Our framework offers a concrete alternative: AI systems that not only assist their users but also help them grow. 8Acknowledgments 

The authors thank Hongrui Zheng and Helen Loeb for insightful discussions. 

# References 

[1] M. Kapur. Productive failure. Cognition and instruction , 26(3):379–424, 2008. [2] J. Metcalfe. Learning from errors. Annual review of psychology , 68(1):465–489, 2017. [3] P. R. Wurman, S. Barrett, K. Kawamoto, J. MacGlashan, K. Subramanian, T. J. Walsh, R. Capobianco, A. Devlic, F. Eckert, F. Fuchs, et al. Outracing champion Gran Tur-ismo drivers with deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 602(7896):223–228, 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04357-7. [4] E. Kaufmann, L. Bauersfeld, A. Loquercio, M. M¨ uller, V. Koltun, and D. Scaramuzza. Champion-level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 620(7976):982–987, 2023. doi:10.1038/s41586-023-06419-4. [5] S. Reddy, A. D. Dragan, and S. Levine. Shared autonomy via deep reinforcement learning. In 

Proc. Robotics: Science and Systems , 2018. doi:10.15607/RSS.2018.XIV.005. [6] J. DeCastro, A. Silva, D. Gopinath, E. Sumner, T. M. Balch, L. Dees, and G. Rosman. Dream-ing to assist: Learning to align with human objectives for shared control in high-speed rac-ing. In Conf. Robot Learning , 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v270/ decastro25a.html .[7] M. Srivastava, R. Iranmanesh, Y. Cui, D. Gopinath, E. S. Sumner, A. Silva, L. Dees, G. Ros-man, and D. Sadigh. Shared autonomy for proximal teaching. In 2025 20th ACM/IEEE Inter-national Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) , pages 232–241. IEEE, 2025. [8] D. D. Oh, J. Lidard, H. Hu, H. Sinhmar, E. Lazarski, D. Gopinath, E. S. Sumner, J. A. De-Castro, G. Rosman, N. E. Leonard, et al. Safety with Agency: Human-Centered Safety Filter with Application to AI-Assisted Motorsports. Proc. Robotics: Science and Systems , 2025. doi:10.15607/RSS.2025.XXI.093. [9] S. Sha, Y. Wang, B. Huang, A. Loquercio, and Y. Li. Efficient and reliable teleoperation through real-to-sim-to-real shared autonomy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.17016 , 2026. [10] H. Bastani, O. Bastani, A. Sungu, H. Ge, ¨ O. Kabakcı, and R. Mariman. Generative AI can harm learning. The Wharton School Research Paper , 2024. [11] B. N. Macnamara, I. Berber, M. C. C ¸ avus ¸o˘ glu, E. A. Krupinski, N. Nallapareddy, N. E. Nelson, P. J. Smith, A. L. Wilson-Delfosse, and S. Ray. Does using artificial intelligence assistance accelerate skill decay and hinder skill development without performers’ awareness? Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications , 9(1):46, 2024. [12] J. Kulveit, R. Douglas, N. Ammann, D. Turan, D. Krueger, and D. Duvenaud. Gradual dis-empowerment: Systemic existential risks from incremental AI development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16946 , 2025. [13] K. Backman, D. Kuli´ c, and H. Chung. Reinforcement learning for shared autonomy drone landings. Autonomous Robots , 47(8):1419–1438, 2023. [14] C. Shen, S. Yu, Y. Weng, H. Ma, C. Li, H. Yasuda, J. Dallas, M. Thompson, J. Subosits, and T. Ersal. Cyber racing coach: A haptic shared control framework for teaching advanced driving skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20653 , 2025. [15] L. S. Vygotsky, M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, and E. Souberman. The development of higher psychological processes, 1978. 9[16] D. Sadigh, N. Landolfi, S. S. Sastry, S. A. Seshia, and A. D. Dragan. Planning for cars that coordinate with people: leveraging effects on human actions for planning and active infor-mation gathering over human internal state. Autonomous Robots , 42(7):1405–1426, 2018. doi:10.1007/s10514-018-9746-1. [17] W. Schwarting, A. Pierson, S. Karaman, and D. Rus. Stochastic dynamic games in belief space. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 37(6):2157–2172, 2021. doi:10.1109/TRO.2021.3075376. [18] H. Hu, Z. Zhang, K. Nakamura, A. Bajcsy, and J. F. Fisac. Deception game: Closing the safety-learning loop in interactive robot autonomy. In Conf. Robot Learning , volume 229 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3830–3850, 11 2023. URL https: //proceedings.mlr.press/v229/hu23b.html .[19] A. Fern, S. Natarajan, K. Judah, and P. Tadepalli. A decision-theoretic model of assistance. 

Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 50:71–104, 2014. doi:https://doi.org/10.1613/jair. 4213. [20] D. Hadfield-Menell, S. J. Russell, P. Abbeel, and A. Dragan. Cooperative inverse reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 3909–3917, 2016. [21] J. F. Fisac, M. A. Gates, J. B. Hamrick, C. Liu, D. Hadfield-Menell, M. Palaniappan, D. Malik, S. S. Sastry, T. L. Griffiths, and A. D. Dragan. Pragmatic-pedagogic value alignment. In 

Robotics Research , pages 49–57. Springer, 2020. [22] C. Laidlaw, E. Bronstein, T. Guo, D. Feng, L. Berglund, J. Svegliato, S. Russell, and A. Dragan. Assistancezero: Scalably solving assistance games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07091 , 2025. [23] E. A. Hansen, D. S. Bernstein, and S. Zilberstein. Dynamic programming for partially observ-able stochastic games. In Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence , volume 4, pages 709–715, 2004. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1597148.1597262 .[24] T. Basar and G. J. Olsder. Dynamic Noncooperative Game Theory . SIAM, London, 1988. URL https://epubs.siam.org/doi/book/10.1137/1.9781611971132 .[25] H. A. Simon. Bounded rationality. Utility and probability , pages 15–18, 1990. [26] D. S. Bernstein, R. Givan, N. Immerman, and S. Zilberstein. The complexity of decentralized control of markov decision processes. Mathematics of operations research , 27(4):819–840, 2002. [27] V. Pasumarti, L. Bianchi, and A. Loquercio. Agile flight emerges from multi-agent competitive racing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.11781 , 2025. [28] R. D. Luce. Individual Choice Behavior . John Wiley, Oxford, England, 1959. URL https: //psycnet.apa.org/fulltext/2013-44649-000-FRM.pdf .[29] C. M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning . Springer, 2006. URL https: //link.springer.com/book/9780387310732 .[30] D. Gopinath, X. Cui, J. DeCastro, E. Sumner, J. Costa, H. Yasuda, A. Morgan, L. Dees, S. Chau, J. Leonard, et al. Computational teaching for driving via multi-task imitation learn-ing. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 7019– 7027. IEEE, 2025. [31] E. Mazumdar, K. Panaganti, and L. Shi. Tractable multi-agent reinforcement learning through behavioral economics. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2025. 10 [32] X. Liu, L. Peters, and J. Alonso-Mora. Learning to play trajectory games against opponents with unknown objectives. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2023. doi:10.1109/LRA. 2023.3280809. [33] H. Hu, J. F. Fisac, N. E. Leonard, D. Gopinath, J. DeCastro, and G. Rosman. Think deep and fast: Learning Neural NOD from inverse dynamic games for split-second interactions. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Robotics and Automation , 2025. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2406.09810. [34] A. P. Jacob, D. J. Wu, G. Farina, A. Lerer, H. Hu, A. Bakhtin, J. Andreas, and N. Brown. Modeling strong and human-like gameplay with KL-regularized search. In International Con-ference on Machine Learning , pages 9695–9728. PMLR, 2022. [35] S. Nikolaidis, D. Hsu, and S. Srinivasa. Human-robot mutual adaptation in collaborative tasks: Models and experiments. Int. Journal of Robotics Research , 36(5-7):618–634, 2017. [36] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347 .[37] A. T. Corbett and J. R. Anderson. Knowledge tracing: Modeling the acquisition of procedural knowledge. User modeling and user-adapted interaction , 4(4):253–278, 1994. doi:10.1007/ BF01099821. [38] C. Piech, J. Bassen, J. Huang, S. Ganguli, M. Sahami, L. J. Guibas, and J. Sohl-Dickstein. Deep knowledge tracing. Advances in neural information processing systems , 28, 2015. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2015/hash/ bac9162b47c56fc8a4d2a519803d51b3-Abstract.html .[39] M. Mittal, C. Yu, Q. Yu, J. Liu, N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, J. L. Yuan, R. Singh, Y. Guo, H. Mazhar, et al. Orbit: A unified simulation framework for interactive robot learning environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 8(6):3740–3747, 2023. 

# A Coaching Policy Training Details 

A.1 Drone Racing Simulation 

We implement the FPV drone-racing task as a vectorized direct-RL environment in Isaac Lab. Our simulator and low-level quadrotor dynamics follow the agile drone-racing simulation setup of Pa-sumarti et al. [27], adapted to our coaching task. The simulator contains a small quadrotor, a static ground plane, and a sequence of collidable gates loaded from USD assets. In training, the scene is replicated across many parallel environments; in the default configuration we use 4096 environ-ments. The task objective is to pass a fixed sequence of square gates quickly while avoiding crashes, altitude violations, and gate timeouts. We use the same quadrotor dynamics as in [27]. The high-level policy runs at 50 Hz and outputs collective thrust and desired body-rate commands. Isaac Lab physics and the body-rate PID loop run at 250 Hz, so each policy action is held for five physics steps. The body-rate controller maps commands to a wrench, which is allocated to motors before thrust, torques, and aerodynamic drag are applied to the rigid body. • Track and objective. The default figure8flat course contains 12 gates arranged as upper/lower loops around a shared center crossing. Gates are passed in a fixed cyclic order, and the learner is evaluated by lap completion time and failure events. • Gate geometry and passing. Each gate has a 1 m square opening and is placed from a waypoint pose [x, y, z, ϕ, θ, ψ ]. For the figure8flat course, the gate xy positions and headings are visual-ized in the right track-layout panel of Figure 6, and all gates use the fixed height z = 2 .0 m . A gate is counted as passed only when the line segment from the previous to the current drone position intersects the current gate plane inside the square opening and crosses in the correct direction. 11 Figure 6: Drone-racing simulation overview. Left: visualization of the quadrotor physical model used. Middle:   

> true-scale size illustration of the quadrotor relative to the gate opening. Right: track-layout visualization show-ing gate order, positions, headings, and traversal direction.

• Observation. The policy observation combines drone state and task-relative state: body angu-lar velocity, global position, body-frame linear velocity, attitude quaternion, the drone position expressed in the current gate frame, and the current gate heading. • Action and frequency. The policy action is a four-dimensional normalized command a =[a0, a 1, a 2, a 3] ∈ [−1, 1] 4, corresponding to collective thrust and desired roll, pitch, and yaw rates. The action is evaluated at 50 Hz and held for five 250 Hz physics/PID steps. • Termination and reset. Episodes reset on contact/crash, altitude above 6.0 m, altitude below 0.1 m after a 1.5 s ground-contact grace period, or failure to reach the next gate within 7.0 s. 

A.2 Network Architecture 

We trained two policies using PPO: an expert drone-racing policy π∗ and an L2C coaching policy 

πCλ . Both use separate actor and critic multilayer perceptrons with ELU activations. The actor hidden dimensions are [128 , 128] , and the critic hidden dimensions are [512 , 256 , 128 , 128] . Each actor outputs the mean of a diagonal Gaussian policy with a learned per-action standard deviation initialized to 1.0; at evaluation time we use the actor mean. The expert policy receives a 17-dimensional observation consisting of body angular velocity, world position, body-frame linear velocity, world-frame orientation quaternion, drone position relative to the current gate in the gate frame, and current gate yaw. Empirical observation normalization is disabled. The actor of π∗ outputs a four-dimensional normalized command comprising collective thrust and roll, pitch, and yaw rates. The L2C coaching policy πCλ receives the same 17-dimensional racing observation concatenated with the learner level θ, giving an 18-dimensional coach observation. The coach actor outputs a two-dimensional blending vector λ for roll and yaw assistance modulation. Because participants control only roll and yaw in our human study, λ is instantiated only on these two human-controlled axes; thrust and pitch are handled by the expert policy and thereby not coached. 

A.3 PPO Training 

We train both policies with PPO in Isaac Lab. First, we train an expert policy capable of racing the drone at high competence. Second, we freeze this expert policy and train the L2C coach. Table 1 reports the PPO settings for both training stages; italic entries indicate settings that differ between the two PPO runs. The coaching policy training loop is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Expert policy training. The expert policy is trained with both task rewards and auxiliary regu-larization rewards. The task rewards encourage progress toward the next gate and successful gate passage. The auxiliary terms encourage the drone to face the gate and avoid motion that novices cannot follow, such as excessive speed, tilt, and yaw rate. These auxiliary terms are important for 12 Table 1: PPO hyperparameters for the expert policy and the L2C coach policy. Italic entries indicate settings that differ between the two PPO runs. 

Parameter Setting 

Learned policy Expert: π∗

Coach: πCλ

The expert policy is separately trained and frozen during coaching policy training Observation / action Expert π∗: 17-D observation, 4-D action (thrust, roll rate, pitch rate, and yaw rate) Coach πCλ : 18-D observation, 2-D blending vector λ

Parallel environments 4096 Rollout length 24 policy steps per environment (0.48 s at 50 Hz) Optimization 4 minibatches, 5 epochs Learning rate 5 × 10 −4 with adaptive KL schedule; target KL = 0 .01 

Discount / GAE γ = 0 .99 , λ = 0 .95 

PPO objective clip = 0 .2; clipped value loss; value-loss coefficient = 1 .0

Regularization max gradient norm = 1 .0

Expert-policy entropy = 0 .0

Coach-policy entropy = 0 .1

Reward signal Expert policy: racing task and speed-regularization rewards Coach policy: skill-level difference 

Training horizon Up to 10,000 PPO iterations 

Algorithm 1 Coaching Policy Training 

1: Input: Expert policy π∗, PFA, human policy parameterization (3), physics simulator 

2: Initialize a set of parallel environments, each with an initial skill level θ ∼ U ([0 , 1]) 

3: for iteration = 1 , . . . , N rollout do 

4: for step = 1 , . . . , N steps do 

5: for each environment do 

6: Observe oLt , oCt , and skill level θt

7: Sample human action via (3): aLt ∼ πL(· | oLt ; θt)

8: Sample blending vector: λt ∼ πCλ (oCt )

9: Compute shared control via (2): at = λt ⊙ π∗(oCt ) + ( 1 − λt) ⊙ aLt

10: Step the environment with the physics simulator and PFA, and observe st+1 and θt+1 

11: Store transition (oCt , λ t, θ t+1 , s t+1 , d t), where the done flag dt is set to True and the environment resets if the skill level changes, i.e., θt+1 ̸ = θt; upon reset, the environment resamples θ from U([0 , 1]) .

12: end for 

13: end for 

14: Update πCλ using PPO [36] with stored transitions across all parallel environments 

15: end for 

the human-study setting: with only sparse task success rewards, the learned policy can race quickly but often uses non-intuitive headings and turns that are difficult for a human learner to parse and imitate. We therefore guide the expert policy toward a stable, gate-facing flight style that remains efficient but is easier for a human to learn. The expert policy uses entropy coefficient 0.0 and takes approximately 8 hours to train. We list and explain important reward components below. • Progress reward. The expert policy receives 5.0 ∆( ρ + ngate ), where ρ = 1 − tanh( ∥pgate −

pdrone ∥/3) and ngate is the number of passed gates. This delta form rewards forward progress through the cyclic gate sequence. • Gate reward. The expert policy receives 50 .0 · 1gate when the drone crosses the current gate plane inside the square opening and in the correct direction. 13 Figure 7: PPO training curves. The top blocks show expert policy reward components, and the bottom row shows the total expert policy and L2C coaching policy training curves. Reward values are normalized internally by Isaac Lab. 

• Failure cost. On a terminated reset, the scalar racing reward is replaced by −200 .0. This cov-ers crash/contact, altitude violation, and gate-timeout termination. The crash and time terms are logged, but their active coefficients are 0.0 in this run. • Neutral terms. Crash and time terms are tracked as diagnostics with active coefficients 0.0; failure affects the scalar reward through the terminal cost above. • Auxiliary terms. The expert policy training also tracks gate-facing alignment, speed, tilt, and yaw rate reward components with coefficients 0.5, −0.015 , −0.01 , and −0.01 , respectively. 

L2C coach training. After training the expert policy, we freeze its weights and reuse it as a fixed corrective reference during L2C coach training. At each timestep, the coach environment samples a simulated learner with skill level θ, the learner produces an action via the Boltzmann policy in (3), and the coach outputs a blending vector λ that combines the expert and learner actions according to the rule in (2). The resulting executed action drives the physics simulator, and the coach is rewarded based on the change in θ governed by the PFA. We train the coaching policy with PPO using an entropy coefficient of 0.1 to encourage exploration over the blending space, with the full training run taking approximately 6.5 hours on a single RTX 5080 GPU. 

A.4 Training Hardware Details 

We use a GPU-accelerated Isaac Lab simulation for policy training and user-study deployment. The final experiment stack uses Python 3.10, PyTorch 2.7.0, Isaac Sim 5.1.0, and Isaac Lab 0.48.5. Training the expert policy on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5080 GPU takes approximately 8 hours, and training the L2C coach takes approximately 6.5 hours. During the human study, all runtime components, including the simulator, policy inference, graphics rendering, controller input, and verbal feedback, ran locally on a single workstation. Expert and L2C 14 policy weights were loaded from PyTorch checkpoints and executed in the same software stack used during training, keeping the deployment self-contained and reproducible. 

# B Deployment Details 

As shown in Figure 1, the experiment employs a high-fidelity FPV drone racing simulator for coach-ing a human pilot to fly a quadrotor through a sequence of gates. The human participant will operate the drone using a remote controller. The task will be presented on a screen showing a first-person onboard camera view, matching the visual feedback available in real-world FPV drone racing [4]. The simulator is implemented in Isaac Lab [39] and uses the same environment as the one in policy training. The system logs the human action, expert action, blended action, drone state, gate passage events, failures, lap or segment times, and assistance magnitude during each trial. All three study conditions use the same simulator, track, user interface, visual cues, and verbal feedback. The two baselines follow their original implementations and hyperparameters with mini-mal adaptations required for moving from the car racing domain to drone racing with the two-axis human-control interface. In summary, the comparison keeps the deployment environment fixed and changes only the assistance method. The simulated racing environment (Figure 2) consists of 12 gates in a figure-eight layout (Figure 6), with two gates spatially overlapping at the central crossing. Participants are instructed to fly through the gates in the prescribed order, completing the course as quickly as possible. 

B.1 User Interface and Visual Cues 

We show the user interface presented to participants during the FPV drone racing study in Figure 8, rendered in real time in Isaac Lab. A static drone rotor is rendered to reduce visual clutter. Top-left displays a color-coded sequence of passed and upcoming gates, with white indicating the current target gate, yellow/green indicating that the gate passage time is slower/faster than that of the last lap, and purple indicating the fastest gate passage time so far. The green arrow on the top indicates the relative direction of the target gate (highlighted in yellow) to the drone. The bottom bars are visual cues, shared across all coaching methods, that aid the human’s steering control, where the yellow line segment shows the expert command, temporally smoothed by blending the current and previous expert actions to reduce visual jitter, and the green block shows the learner’s action. A head-up display (HUD) on the bottom displays the current lap time, current gate index, current lap number, last lap time, and best lap time. 

> Figure 8: User interface presented to participants during the AI coaching for FPV drone racing study.

15 B.2 Verbal Feedback 

All coaches (L2C, RBF, and MIA) use verbal feedback delivered over the simulator audio channel. We pre-generated a library of short audio clips using a text-to-speech model, organized into two categories: (i) control suggestions indicating the corrective direction along each control axis (e.g., 

“yaw slightly left” , “maintain current roll” ), and (ii) encouragement reinforcing successful maneu-vers (e.g., “you are doing well” ). At runtime, clip selection is driven by the per-axis discrepancy 

|aL − π∗(oC )|: when an axis exceeds a directional-error threshold, the corresponding control sug-gestion is queued; otherwise an encouragement clip is selected. A 5-second cooldown is enforced between successive clips to prevent auditory overload and to give the learner time to act on each cue. 

# C User Study Details 

C.1 Experimental Phases 

We structure each trial into three phases: a pre- and post-coaching test (2 laps each), and a main coached training session. Since the majority of our participants are novices (have never operated a drone), learning to simultaneously control all four axes (thrust and roll, pitch, and yaw rates) of a racing drone in 40 minutes would be prohibitively difficult. We therefore restrict the human’s control authority to yaw and roll rate while automating the pitch rate and thrust; in effect, the human is only in charge of steering. In Phase 1 (pre-coaching test), participants will complete an unassisted flight to assess their initial drone-racing skill. The phase ends after two completed laps. In Phase 2 (coaching), participants will learn to fly the racing drone with assistance from their randomly assigned AI coach. To prevent participant fatigue, we limit the coaching session to 15 laps (around 40 minutes, depending on learner capability). Every three coached laps, the coach performs an unassisted evaluation lap in which the learner flies alone, providing a clean signal for updating the coach’s belief over learner skill level bℓt at gate ℓ.In Phase 3 (post-coaching test), participants complete two unassisted evaluation laps, mirroring the Phase 1 pre-coaching test. The difference between pre- and post-test performance is our primary measure of coaching-induced skill change. 

C.2 Initial Group Balance 

Based on self-reported drone-operating experience measured on a five-point scale (Appendix C.3), we found no statistically significant differences in initial skill levels across the three groups. In ad-dition, from Phase 1 data, we verified that the three randomly assigned groups achieved comparable initial objective performance. Figure 9 reports pre-coaching lap time and pre-coaching total failure count for all participants ( N = 33 ). Through a one-way permutation ANOVA test, we found no reliable group difference for either lap time ( p = 0 .192 ) or failure count ( p = 0 .663 ).       

> Figure 9: Initial group balance before coaching. Left: pre-coaching lap time. Right: pre-coaching total failure count. Bars show mean ±SEM, and dots show individual participants.

16 C.3 Questionnaire 

Prior to the trial, participants self-reported their drone-piloting experience on a five-point scale: 1. No Experience: Have not operated a drone; have not played drone racing games, flight simula-tion games, or similar games using a controller. 2. Casual Experience: Have occasionally operated consumer drones in low-speed scenarios (e.g., photography), or have played flight simulation games with a controller 3. Regular Experience: Have regularly operated consumer drones, or have regularly played flight simulator games using a controller. 4. Extensive Experience: Have regularly flown FPV drones, or have regularly practiced drone racing simulators to a proficient level (e.g., completing technical tracks cleanly at pace). Has not competed in organized races. 5. Competitive Experience: Have competed in organized drone racing events, or regularly trains on drone racing simulators. Based on the participant feedback, our pool consisted primarily of novices: 61.1% reported No Experience, 36.1% reported Casual Experience, and 2.8% reported Regular Experience, with no participant reporting Extensive or Competitive Experience. A one-way ANOVA confirmed no sta-tistically significant differences in initial self-reported skill across the three groups. 

C.3.1 Questionnaire Metrics 

After Phase 3 concludes, we collect a post-study questionnaire (5-point Likert scale) assessing sub-jective learning experience on perceived improvement, agency, and satisfaction (see Table 2). The results are shown in Figure 4.          

> Table 2: Post-study survey items.
> Metric Questionnaire item Scoring
> Safety Compared to my first race, I flew more safely in the final race. Higher is better Performance I believe my overall drone racing performance has improved since my first race. Higher is better Agency The AI coach intervened too much throughout the race. Reverse-coded; higher plotted value is better Satisfaction Overall, I am happy with how the training went. Higher is better

# D Proof of Proposition 1 

Setup. Let θt ∈ Θ = {θ1, . . . , θ N } denote the learner’s discrete latent skill level at time t, ordered so that θ1 < θ 2 < · · · < θ N . For any physical state s ∈ S and skill level θ ∈ Θ, define the learner’s 

independent continuation value 

V ind (s, θ ) ≜ E

" ∞X

> k=0

γk rtask (st+k, a Lt+k) st = s, θ t = θ, aCt+k ≡ 0, ∀k ≥ 0

#

, (4) namely, the discounted return the learner would obtain if the coach withdrew assistance from (s, θ )

onward. Fix a policy-independent evaluation distribution peval ∈ ∆( S) and define the evaluation-averaged VoI 

¯rC (θ) ≜ E

> s∼peval

V ind (s, θ ) . (5) We assume rtask is uniformly bounded, so ¯rC is bounded as well. For the analysis below, we focus on a simplified, yet pedagogically relevant regime of the hybrid PFA in which skill does not decrease 17 within an episode ( βS = 0 ). Concretely, from skill level θi with i < N , the learner either remains at θi or advances to θi+1 in one step; the top skill level θN is absorbing. If we also consider downskilling, the proof becomes more delicate: the key monotonicity step in Lemma 1 is no longer automatic. However, one may impose additional conditions, such as stochastic monotonicity of the full skill-transition kernel, to recover the same dominance conclusion. Let pπC

> succ

(θi) denote the success probability under coach πC at skill θi. Conditional on success, the learner upskills with probability αS (θi); conditional on failure, the learner upskills with probability αF (θi). The resulting one-step skill-transition kernel under coach πC is therefore 

P πC

(θi+1 | θi) = pπC

> succ

(θi) αS (θi) +  1 − pπC

> succ

(θi) αF (θi), i = 1 , . . . , N − 1, (6) with 

P πC

(θi | θi) = 1 − P πC

(θi+1 | θi), P πC

(θN | θN ) = 1 .

We define the effective upskill probability as pπC 

> ↑

(θi) ≜ P πC

(θi+1 | θi) for i = 1 , . . . , N − 1.

Assumption 1. ¯rC (θ) is nondecreasing in θ ∈ Θ.

Assumption 1 states that more skilled learners are no worse off on average when left to act alone, reflecting the basic coaching premise that increased skill corresponds to improved indepen-dent competence. Note that a more interpretable sufficient condition is the pointwise inequality 

V ind (s, θ ) ≤ V ind (s, θ ′) for every s ∈ S and every pair θ ≤ θ′ in Θ, which implies Assumption 1 by taking expectation over s ∼ peval .We first show that local one-step kernel dominance propagates to all future skill marginals. 

Lemma 1. If two coach policies πC and ˜πC have the same initial distribution, and πC dominates 

˜πC , i.e., pπC 

> ↑

(θi) ≥ p˜πC 

> ↑

(θi) for i ∈ { 1, . . . , N − 1}, then the induced skill marginals satisfy first-order stochastic dominance (FOSD) at every time: 

P πC

(θt ≥ θj ) ≥ P ˜πC

(θt ≥ θj ), ∀j ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, ∀t ≥ 0. (7) 

Equivalently, for every nondecreasing function ϕ : Θ → R,

E

> πC

[ϕ(θt)] ≥ E

> ˜πC

[ϕ(θt)] , ∀t ≥ 0.

Proof. We prove the equivalent test-function characterization by induction on t.

Base case. At t = 0 , the claim holds because the initial skill distributions are equal by assumption. 

Inductive step. Assume that for some t ≥ 0, EπC [ϕ(θt)] ≥ E˜πC [ϕ(θt)] for every nondecreasing ϕ : Θ → R.Let ϕ : Θ → R be any nondecreasing function. Define 

gπC

(θ) ≜ E  

> θ′∼PπC(·| θ)

[ϕ(θ′)] , g˜πC

(θ) ≜ E  

> θ′∼P˜πC(·| θ)

[ϕ(θ′)] .

By the law of total expectation, the expected value of ϕ(θt+1 ) can be computed by first conditioning on the current skill θt, and then averaging over θt. Therefore, by definition of gπC

, we have E[ϕ(θt+1 ) | θt] = 

gπC

(θt), which yields: 

E 

> πC

[ϕ(θt+1 )] = E 

> πC

[gπC

(θt)] , E 

> ˜πC

[ϕ(θt+1 )] = E 

> ˜πC

[g˜πC

(θt)] . (8) We now establish two facts. 

Fact 1: gπC

(θ) ≥ g˜πC

(θ) for every θ ∈ Θ.For i < N , both kernels are supported on {θi, θ i+1 }, and πC dominates ˜πC implies that P πC

(· | θi) ⪰FOSD 

P ˜πC

(· | θi). Since ϕ is nondecreasing, taking expectations preserves the order: gπC

(θi) ≥ g˜πC

(θi). At the absorbing top state θN , both kernels are point masses at θN , so equality holds. 

Fact 2: g˜πC

is nondecreasing on Θ.For i < N , g˜πC

(θi) =  1 − p˜πC 

> ↑

(θi)ϕ(θi) + p˜πC 

> ↑

(θi)ϕ(θi+1 ), so g˜πC

(θi) is a convex combination of 

ϕ(θi) and ϕ(θi+1 ). Therefore, ϕ(θi) ≤ g˜πC

(θi) ≤ ϕ(θi+1 ). Likewise, ϕ(θi+1 ) ≤ g˜πC

(θi+1 ) ≤ ϕ(θi+2 )

18 for i ≤ N − 2, and at the top state, g˜πC

(θN ) = ϕ(θN ). Hence g˜πC

(θi) ≤ ϕ(θi+1 ) ≤ g˜πC

(θi+1 ) for 

i = 1 , . . . , N − 1, so g˜πC

is nondecreasing. Using (8), Facts 1–2, and the inductive hypothesis with the nondecreasing test function g˜πC

, we obtain 

E 

> πC

[ϕ(θt+1 )] = E 

> πC

[gπC

(θt)] (Law of total expectation) 

≥ E 

> πC

[g˜πC

(θt)] (Fact 1) 

≥ E 

> ˜πC

[g˜πC

(θt)] (Induction + Fact 2: g˜πC

is nondecreasing) 

= E 

> ˜πC

[ϕ(θt+1 )] (Law of total expectation) The claim follows for t + 1 .

Remark 1. Inequality pπC 

> ↑

(θi) ≥ p˜πC 

> ↑

(θi) essentially says that from any current skill level, coach 

πC induces a weakly more favorable next-step skill distribution than coach ˜πC . Importantly, this condition does not force the better coach to maximize immediate success, because both success and failure may produce upskilling through αS and αF , so a coach may satisfy pπC 

> ↑

(θi) ≥ p˜πC 

> ↑

(θi) either by increasing success when success is more pedagogically productive, or by strategically allowing informative failures when failure is more productive. A sufficient condition for pπC 

> ↑

(θi) ≥ p˜πC 

> ↑

(θi) is the pointwise inequality 



pπC

> succ

(θi) − p˜πC

> succ

(θi)

 

αS (θi) − αF (θi)



≥ 0, i = 1 , . . . , N − 1,

obtained by subtracting (6) for the two policies. The condition states that the change in success probability induced by the coach aligns with the relative pedagogical value of success versus failure events, thereby increasing the learner’s overall upskilling probability. 

We can now state the desired connection between skill dominance and VoI dominance. 

Proposition 1 (Skill dominance implies VoI dominance) . Suppose Assumption 1 holds. If a coach-ing policy πC induces a weakly higher one-step upskill probability than ˜πC at every skill level, i.e., 

pπC 

> ↑

(θi) ≥ p˜πC 

> ↑

(θi) for i ∈ { 1, . . . , N − 1}, then 

E

> πC

" ∞X

> t=0

γt ¯rC (θt)

#

≥ E

> ˜πC

" ∞X

> t=0

γt ¯rC (θt)

#

. (9) 

Proof. By Assumption 1, ¯rC is nondecreasing on Θ. Next, by Lemma 1, for every t ≥ 0,

θπC 

> t

⪰FOSD θ˜πC 

> t

.

Applying the test-function characterization of FOSD with the nondecreasing function ¯rC yields 

E 

> πC

[¯ rC (θt)] ≥ E 

> ˜πC

[¯ rC (θt)] , ∀t ≥ 0.

Multiplying by γt ≥ 0 and summing over t preserves the inequality. Because ¯rC is bounded and γ ∈ [0 , 1) ,the discounted series is absolutely convergent, so we can exchange the sum and expectation using Fubini’s theorem, which gives EπC

P ∞ 

> t=0

γt ¯rC (θt) ≥ E˜πC

P ∞ 

> t=0

γt ¯rC (θt).

19