Title: DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19656v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 00:26:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

Calvin Luo 1 2 Chen Sun 2 Shuran Song 1

# Abstract 

A natural recipe for intelligent robotic decision-making is initializing from pretrained generative control policies, which have summarized offline experience, and adapting them to self-collected online experience. We present DF-ExpEnse, an exploration technique that improves the quality of online experience collection, thus increasing fine-tuning sample-efficiency. DF-ExpEnse leverages the multimodal modeling capabilities of the gen-erative control policy to create an expressive and tractably evaluatable candidate set. It then utilizes an ensemble of critics to identify the action that best balances quality with high exploration inter-est. In fleet settings, DF-ExpEnse further enables cross-agent communication to facilitate collabo-rative exploration as a group. DF-ExpEnse can be seamlessly integrated with existing strategies that finetune pretrained generative control policies via reinforcement learning. We experimentally vali-date consistent sample-efficiency benefits through DF-ExpEnse across a variety of manipulation and locomotion tasks, compared to default finetuning and alternative action selection schemes. Project can be found at df-expense.github.io .

# 1. Introduction 

Crucial to increasing sample efficiency for robotic policy im-provement is effective exploration during online experience. We identify two promising developments that naturally sup-port the investigation and design of enhanced exploration strategies. First, advances in behavior cloning (Pomerleau, 1988; Bain & Sammut, 1995) through action-space gener-ative modeling such as diffusion policies (Chi et al., 2023) have enabled the conversion of offline demonstrations into strong behavior priors. Such pretrained generative policies are attractive to apply reinforcement learning finetuning on 

> 1

Stanford University 2Brown University. Correspondence to: Calvin Luo <calvinyl@stanford.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

Figure 1. DF-ExpEnse Overview. At each timestep, DF-ExpEnse selects an exploratory action to execute by performing three steps. First, (a) filters the continuous action space by generating multiple samples from the diffusion policy. Then, (b) estimates exploration interest in each action with respect to quality and uncertainty using an ensemble. Lastly, (c) normalizes exploration interest across the fleet and selects the action with the maximum interest to execute. 

top of (Ankile et al., 2025a; Ren et al., 2024; Wagenmaker et al., 2025), but are also capable of generating diverse modes of actions (Figure 1) suitable for exploration. Second, advances in parallelization either through simulation envi-ronments or large-scale real-world deployments (Agaskar et al., 2025; Schwall et al., 2020) naturally scale up online experience collection. Beyond simply increasing the quan-tity of data gathered, we believe such robotic fleets also hold potential in improving the quality of collected experi-ence for efficient finetuning when used in a collaborative 

manner. In this work, we investigate how offline-pretrained diffusion policies instantiated across robotic fleets can per-form principled exploration as a collective group to improve decision-making finetuning in a sample-efficient manner. We present D iffusion Filtered Exp loration via Ense mbles (DF-ExpEnse) , a technique that can be applied to improve exploratory action selection during online experience collec-tion, and facilitate increased sample efficiency in finetuning a pretrained diffusion policy. In the design of DF-ExpEnse, we are guided by three motivating questions of interest: 

1. How can we quantify the exploration interest an agent has for an arbitrary action in a principled manner? 2. How can we tractably identify reasonable actions worth exploring amongst a continuous action space? 3. How can we achieve benefits from enabling parallelized deployments of agents to collaborate on exploration as a group rather than operating individually? 

1

> arXiv:2606.19656v1 [cs.RO] 17 Jun 2026 DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning

Ideally, efficient exploration strategies should seek to bal-ance high-quality actions along with uncertainty reduction. DF-ExpEnse utilizes an ensemble of critics as a natural mechanism for simultaneously quantifying both action quality as well as estimated uncertainty (Chen et al., 2017). Inspired by Upper Confidence Bounds (UCB) (Auer et al., 2002) action selection, DF-ExpEnse calculates exploration interest in an action as a linear combination of value estima-tion, computed as the minimum of the ensemble predictions, and critic disagreement, computed as the standard deviation of the ensemble predictions. DF-ExpEnse can reuse existing critic ensembles from the underlying reinforcement learn-ing framework. In robotic decision-making, which features a continuous action space, finetuning is often performed through policy gradient techniques, which commonly uti-lize an ensemble of critics to evaluate experience and guide policy updates. However, beyond limiting their utilization to the optimization step alone, DF-ExpEnse proposes extend-ing their usage to online inference as well to quantifiably estimate exploration interest of an action before selection. Whereas using ensembles to evaluate and rank every possi-ble action before choosing the optimal one for execution is tractable in environments with discrete action spaces (Chen et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2023), the continuous action space commonly featured in robotic decision-making makes this exhaustive search infeasible. How can we tractably identify 

the action that best balances quality against uncertainty from a continuous action space? DF-ExpEnse leverages the mul-timodal modeling capability of the diffusion policy during online inference to propose a set of action candidates which 1) exhibit broad coverage of the action space when helpful, 2) are of a base admissible quality to consider executing, and 3) are of a tractable size to enumeratively evaluate. DF-ExpEnse thus essentially treats the modes estimated by the diffusion policy, approximated by sampled outputs, as a reasonable constrained space over which to search for an exploratory action worth attempting in the environment. Rapid simulator advancements and increasing amounts of real-world robotic deployments naturally enable parallelized online experience collection. Commonly, each member of a robotic fleet performs inference independently; however, this naive approach may result in agents simultaneously gathering highly similar or redundant data. When instanti-ated in a fleet setting, DF-ExpEnse performs real-time cross-fleet communication to encourage the group as a whole to 

collaborate on collecting high-quality and diverse online experience. In particular, DF-ExpEnse exposes the critic ensemble predictions of each agent across the fleet at each timestep. Then, before action selection, each individual agent normalizes their exploration interest estimates using statistics from the entire fleet. This helps to rescale locally considered candidate actions according to global fleet infor-mation, allowing the identification and selection of actions that are relatively more uncertain or valuable contextualized by the situations and considerations of the rest of the group. In a return to the central motivating questions, DF-ExpEnse uses a critic ensemble to quantify exploration interest, a sample-based approximation of the diffusion policy’s multi-modal distribution for tractable action evaluation, and real-time communication across the fleet to effectively contex-tualize candidate actions and facilitate group-collaborative exploration. DF-ExpEnse is a general exploration technique, and can be directly applied on top of a variety of methods that finetune diffusion policies through reinforcement learn-ing to improve online experience collection quality. In our experiments, we combine DF-ExpEnse with DSRL (Wagen-maker et al., 2025) as well as ResFiT (Ankile et al., 2025a), and perform evaluations on manipulation tasks from the RoboMimic suite (Mandlekar et al., 2021), locomotion tasks from OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016), and bimanual manipulation tasks from DexMimicGen (Jiang et al., 2025). We consistently find that DF-ExpEnse achieves higher sam-ple efficiency against vanilla reinforcement learning finetun-ing techniques as well as alternative exploration baselines. We also perform ablations on all three key components of our method: the size of the ensemble, the size of the sam-pled action set, and the size of the fleet. We empirically verify DF-ExpEnse to be a robust technique that can mean-ingfully improve online exploration behavior and the sample efficient finetuning of pretrained generative control policies. 

# 2. Background and Related Work 

Finetuning Diffusion Policies with Reinforcement Learn-ing: Diffusion policies (Chi et al., 2023) have enabled the learning of powerful robotic decision-making models from behavior cloning on offline data. However, we also wish to enable a decision-making agent to continuously improve itself with respect to self-collected online experience (Silver & Sutton, 2025). As such, utilizing reinforcement learning to finetune pretrained diffusion policies is of interest. Re-siP (Ankile et al., 2025b) and ResFiT (Ankile et al., 2025a) use a residual policy (Silver et al., 2018) that learns to adjust the output of a frozen diffusion policy via reinforcement learning. DPPO (Ren et al., 2024) treats the denoising pro-cedure of action sampling as its own inner Markov Decision Process, and finetunes the weights of the diffusion policy directly with respect to environment feedback. DSRL (Wa-genmaker et al., 2025), like the residual approach, keeps the pretrained diffusion policy frozen but learns an input noise selection policy through reinforcement. Our work seeks to increase sample efficiency in combining reinforce-ment learning updates with a pretrained diffusion policy by improving exploration during online experience collection, and can be seamlessly integrated on top of these techniques. 

Ensembles for Uncertainty Estimation: Upper-confidence bound algorithms (Auer et al., 2002) that utilize ensembles 2DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

to estimate uncertainty have been used in prior works for improved exploration (Chen et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2021) as well as generalization (Jiang et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024). We apply a similar UCB action selection strategy to identify and execute action candidates that best balance quality with uncertainty. However, because the ensembles are used to evaluate individual actions at a time, such works are usually applied over environments with discrete action spaces. Prior works (Lee et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2024) bypass this restric-tion in continuous action spaces by utilizing an ensemble of policies in tandem to generate a discrete set of proposal actions. In this work, we show that the multimodal model-ing property of diffusion policies can filter the continuous action space into a set of reasonable candidates to consider, with broad coverage over the action space when necessary. 

Inference Time Selection: Sampling a set of action can-didates from the policy before selecting one for execu-tion allows for more intentional, targeted behavior. V-GPS (Nakamoto et al., 2024) generates multiple prospects from a pretrained policy and samples one to execute weighted by their Q-value estimate. However, the goal of V-GPS is to steer a generalist robotic policy for downstream deployment, whereas our work seeks to achieve explorative 

experience collection and sample-efficient finetuning of the policy. Rather than sampling, EMaQ (Ghasemipour et al., 2021) and Q-Chunking (Li et al., 2026) select the action candidate with the maximum estimated Q-value. Selecting the maximum value can ignore exploration interest, and can lead to a less robust and generalizable policy over finetuning iterations. We compare our exploration technique against a Max-Q selection baseline and demonstrate improvements with respect to downstream finetuning sample-efficiency. 

Fleet Learning: As parallelization capabilities improve in simulators (Makoviychuk et al., 2021) and real-world robotic deployments increase (Kalashnikov et al., 2021; Herzog et al., 2023), how to effectively harness such robotic fleets for enhanced policy learning is of great in-terest. Prior works have leveraged massive parallelization to quickly learn locomotion policies that transfer to the real world (Rudin et al., 2022). FLEET-MERGE (Wang et al., 2024) describes how merging policies across a fleet can still enable fleet-level learning without explicitly storing data in a centralized manner. SAPG (Singla et al., 2024) splits large-scale parallelized environments into chunks with separate policies, and aggregates their data through importance sam-pling to update a leader policy. In this work, we investigate how collaborative exploration as a group can be achieved for sample-efficient finetuning, by enabling real-time commu-nication across the fleet when performing action selection. 

# 3. Method 

We present Diffusion Filtered Exploration via Ensembles (DF-ExpEnse), which can be applied on top of reinforce-ment learning techniques that finetune offline pretrained generative control policies to improve their exploration and sample efficiency. We then describe how DF-ExpEnse can be extended when utilized in a fleet setting to communicate across agents and facilitate exploration as a collective group. 

3.1. Diffusion Filtered Exploration via Ensembles (DF-ExpEnse) 

At each timestep of online experience collection, DF-ExpEnse utilizes two model components: the diffusion pol-icy πdp θ (·) initially instantiated with offline behavior cloning pretraining, and a K-sized ensemble of Q-value functions 

Q[1 ...K ](·), which can be randomly initialized. The critic ensemble, which is normally utilized during policy gradient updates, can be reused during this online inference step to help identify actions of exploratory interest to the agent. At each timestep, we generate a set of M candidate outputs conditioned on the current state s using i.i.d. sampling: 

[a1, . . . , aM ] ∼ πdp θ (a | s). (1) We then compute exploration interest of each candidate ac-tion in the set as a linear combination of their value estimate and the critic disagreement, as evaluated by the ensemble:           

> em= min  Q[1 ...K ](am,s)+α∗std  Q[1 ...K ](am,s)

(2) where the action’s estimated value is represented by the minimum of the critic ensemble min  Q[1 ...K ](am, s) to reduce potential overestimation, and its uncertainty is esti-mated via critic disagreement as the standard deviation over the ensemble’s predictions. This is essentially a min-value version of UCB (Auer et al., 2002). Intuitively, if an action is roundly agreed upon to be of good quality by all critics in that the minimum estimation is high, but there is substan-tial disagreement amongst the critics as to what the exact value is, it is most likely a high-quality but underexplored action worth executing (Chen et al., 2017). Here, α is a hyperparameter that controls how much the agent considers uncertainty when computing an action’s exploration interest. Lastly, DF-ExpEnse selects the action candidate with the maximum estimated exploration interest for execution: 

a⋆ ← arg max  

> a∈[a1,..., aM]

[e1, . . . , e M ] . (3) The online experience collected by DF-ExpEnse can be di-rectly utilized by off-the-shelf reinforcement learning tech-niques to finetune the agent. We note that when α = 0 , the agent performs exploitative behavior, consistently select-ing the action candidate with the highest estimated value at each timestep. This is equivalent to what is described in EMaQ (Ghasemipour et al., 2021) and Q-Chunking (Li et al., 2026); we treat this greedy strategy as a natural baseline, and provide extensive experimental comparisons against it. 3DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

3.2. Behavior Cloning Sampling Regularization (BC-SR) 

At heart, DF-ExpEnse relies on the multimodal modeling ca-pability of the diffusion policy to constrain the search space of considered actions to a tractable size, helping the critic ensemble to focus its evaluation on candidates with a base admissible quality, and a broad coverage of the action space. However, over multiple rounds of finetuning, the agent may naturally begin to converge on fewer action modes. This can negatively affect exploration; in the extreme case where all candidates were sampled from the same mode, performing more principled action selection becomes futile. Thus, in order to foster continued exploration throughout finetuning we propose regularizing the set of action candidates with samples from the initial offline-pretrained diffusion policy, denoted by πdp θinit (·), which we expect to preserve more mul-timodal action modeling. Concretely, for a regularization integer p ≤ M , we override the action candidate set with: 

[ˆa1, . . . , ˆap] ∼ πdp θinit (a | s), (4) resulting in a final considered action candidate set of: 

[ˆa1, . . . , ˆap, . . . , aM ] . (5) We term this regularization technique Behavior Cloning Sampling Regularization (BC-SR) . Intuitively, BC-SR can be thought of as an inference-time technique similar in spirit to BC regularization (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Zhao et al., 2022; Nair et al., 2020; Goecks et al., 2019). Whereas BC regularization in reinforcement learning is a loss term that encourages the weights of the policy to remember how to generate samples from the offline dataset during the opti-mization procedure, here we regularize the set of candidate actions to consider for exploration directly, using generated samples from a BC model trained only on the offline dataset. Thus, BC-SR encourages the agent not to forget multimodal priors from offline pretraining during online inference. This approach is similar to the Actor Proposal step of IBRL (Hu et al., 2024) with two differences: firstly, the policy self-produces proposals through its own previous checkpoint rather than utilizing two separate models, effectively per-forming bootstrapped self-improvement, and secondly, the policy is instantiated as a diffusion policy with expressive multimodal modeling capabilities, enabling the sampling of a potentially more diverse action candidate set to consider. 

3.3. DF-ExpEnse with Fleet Normalization 

Thus far, DF-ExpEnse details how an individual agent can improve exploration quality by leveraging the multimodal nature of the generative policy combined with a critic en-semble during online inference. However, in the era of robotic fleets and highly parallelizable simulators, collect-ing online data for finetuning can be done in an increasingly synchronous manner. In particular, such developments allow DF-ExpEnse to access multiple agents deployed in parallel. Robotic fleets naturally increase the quantity of online data collection; in this work, we investigate strategies to also improve the quality of such collected experience. Whereas robotic fleets commonly deploy their agents independently from each other, we believe that there is potential in achiev-ing more effective exploration as a group by enabling cross-fleet communication. By enabling communication between agents in a real-time, dynamic manner, they can collaborate to avoid exploring or experiencing redundant trajectories. We thus describe the behavior of DF-ExpEnse in a fleet setting, to further improve collective exploration as a group. The key insight is that having each agent share their individ-ual critic ensemble prediction terms with other members in real-time as summarized statistics can help contextualize the exploration interest of each candidate set against the rest of the fleet, and lead to improved collective decision-making. Concretely, for a parallelized fleet of size N , DF-ExpEnse first generates a set of M candidate outputs per individual agent, indexed by n ∈ [1 , . . . , N ], conditioned on their respective currently observed state sn, using i.i.d. sampling: 

[an, 1, . . . , an,M ] ∼ πdp θ (a | sn). (6) At each timestep, we thus consider a set of N × M actions, aggregated across all agents in the fleet. DF-ExpEnse has each agent then calculate their individual value estimates and uncertainty scores using the critic ensemble as before: 

vn,m = min  Q[1 ...K ](an,m , sn) (7) 

dn,m = std  Q[1 ...K ](an,m , sn) . (8) However, in the fleet setting, we further normalize each ex-ploration interest component with respect to their respective terms aggregated from all candidate actions across the fleet: 

¯vn,m = vn,m − avg ([ v1,1, ..., v N,M ]) 

std ([ v1,1, ..., v N,M ]) (9) 

¯dn,m = dn,m − avg ([ d1,1, ..., d N,M ]) 

std ([ d1,1, ..., d N,M ]) (10) 

¯en,m = ¯ vn,m + α ∗ ¯dn,m (11) where exploration interest ¯en,m is now the linear combina-tion of fleet-normalized value and critic disagreement predic-tions. Then, for each fleet agent indexed by n ∈ [1 , . . . , N ],the action candidate with the maximum estimated explo-ration interest after fleet normalization is selected and run: 

a⋆n ← arg max  

> a∈[an, 1,..., an,M ]

[¯ en, 1, . . . , ¯en,M ] . (12) In Section 4.7 we empirically find that using fleet normaliza-tion provides sample-efficiency benefits beyond running a fleet of individual DF-ExpEnse agents in mutual isolation. 4DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning  

> Figure 2. Baseline Comparisons . We compare DF-ExpEnse against vanilla DSRL, a Max-Q selection scheme, as well as other exploration baselines on RoboMimic manipulation and OpenAI Gym locomotion tasks, averaged over three random seeds. DF-ExpEnse consistently achieves superior sample-efficiency compared to other baselines, achieving a higher average success rate or reward score given the same amount of online experience timesteps. The benefits over vanilla DSRL, which DF-ExpEnse extends, demonstrate that using DF-ExpEnse can meaningfully increase principled exploration ability. Furthermore, as Max-Q also selects an action from a sampled candidate set, we demonstrate that the additional design decisions behind DF-ExpEnse directly correspond to performance improvements. DF-ExpEnse also outperforms techniques that utilize additional components, such as dynamics models, without needing additional components itself.

# 4. Experiments 

We study how the exploration enhancements provided by DF-ExpEnse can aid sample-efficiency in finetuning a pre-trained diffusion policy through reinforcement learning. As DF-ExpEnse is a technique for collecting experience during online inference, it can be seamlessly integrated with a va-riety of reinforcement learning finetuning techniques that perform the underlying policy optimization. Furthermore, DF-ExpEnse can be enabled or disabled at will; during in-ference rollouts for evaluation, when we seek to assess the quality of the finetuned policy directly, DF-ExpEnse is not used to ensure fair comparison with alternate techniques. No additional compute is utilized at test-time when evaluating policies finetuned via DF-ExpEnse against other baselines. We begin by describing the choice of reinforcement learning algorithms used in our experiments, the tasks and environ-ments chosen, the settings of the model components used, and the standard hyperparameters that DF-ExpEnse utilizes. 

4.1. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms 

We select DSRL (Noise Aliasing) (Wagenmaker et al., 2025) as the main underlying technique to perform reinforcement learning finetuning of a pretrained diffusion policy. DSRL freezes the pretrained diffusion policy and only interfaces with it via deterministic sampling, such as DDIM (Song et al., 2021). It performs reinforcement learning finetuning of the overall agent by optimizing a noise selector, imple-mented as a Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) agent (Haarnoja et al., 2018), that generates input noise to pass into the diffusion model’s deterministic sampling procedure. The code imple-mentation of SAC used by DSRL, and thus reused in our experiments, is from Stable-Baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021). DF-ExpEnse extends vanilla DSRL only during the online experience collection step. In standard DSRL, the agent simply samples a singular action and directly executes it; with DF-ExpEnse, the executed action is selected from a sampled batch of action candidates according to exploration interest. We maintain the same quantity of data collection and keep the same underlying DSRL optimization scheme with respect to collected data to ensure fair comparison. As such, benefits in performance over vanilla DSRL can directly be attributed to an increase in quality of the data being collected, showcasing the benefits of careful action selection with respect to exploration. We provide a detailed tabulation of DSRL hyperparameters in Appendix A, where any deviations are denoted with an asterisk. A pseudocode of DF-ExpEnse with DSRL is provided in Appendix G. We also investigate the integration of DF-ExpEnse with ResFiT (Ankile et al., 2025a), an alternate reinforcement learning finetuning technique which instead optimizes a residual that adjusts a base action prediction. As with DSRL, DF-ExpEnse only extends ResFiT during online experience collection; all updates are performed with the same hyper-parameters and settings as vanilla ResFiT. A pseudocode of DF-ExpEnse with ResFiT is provided in Appendix H. We therefore demonstrate that DF-ExpEnse is a general online exploration technique that can be seamlessly combined with a variety of different strategies for updating pretrained gener-ative control policies via reinforcement learning finetuning. 5DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning  

> Figure 3. ResFiT Baseline Comparisons . We integrate DF-ExpEnse with ResFiT, and compare against a Max-Q selection scheme and vanilla ResFiT on DexMimicGen bimanual manipulation tasks, averaged over three random seeds. DF-ExpEnse continues to demonstrate sample-efficiency benefits compared to other baselines, achieving higher average success rates given the same amount of online experience. The successful application to an alternate reinforcement learning finetuning strategy highlights the general nature of DF-ExpEnse.

4.2. Tasks and Environments RoboMimic Environment (Manipulation): We report results on the Lift, Can, Square, and Tool Hang tasks from the RoboMimic suite. These tasks are listed in order of difficulty, as described by the RoboMimic authors (Man-dlekar et al., 2021). In particular, Tool Hang is the most complex, long-horizon task, where the robot must first as-semble a frame through targeted insertion before picking up a tool and hanging it on the constructed frame. By de-fault, RoboMimic provides sparse 0-1 rewards based on the success of the entire trajectory. For experiments on these tasks, we report success rate against environment timesteps collected throughout the duration of policy finetuning. 

OpenAI Gym Environment (Locomotion): We report results on the HalfCheetah-v2, Hopper-v2, and Walker2D-v2 locomotion tasks. Evaluation is reported as a numerical score computed by a ground-truth reward function against environment timesteps collected throughout finetuning. 

DexMimicGen (Bimanual Manipulation): We report results on the Can Sort, Box Cleanup, and Coffee bimanual manipulation tasks from DexMimicGen, for ResFiT-based experiments. Evaluation is computed as binary success rates of overall trajectories logged against collected timesteps. In evaluations for all tasks across all environments, numeri-cal results are reported as averages over 100 rollouts, gener-ated purely from the agent throughout stages of finetuning. DF-ExpEnse is disabled during test-time inference; it is only utilized when collecting online experience for optimization. 

4.3. Base Diffusion Policy Implementations 

In applying DF-ExpEnse as an exploration technique on top of DSRL, we reuse the same open-sourced pretrained diffu-sion policy checkpoints as in DSRL whenever available, for consistency. As noted in the DSRL manuscript, these check-points are themselves reused from the DPPO (Ren et al., 2024) public release, with the exception of the RoboMimic Square checkpoint which was separately pretrained to in-crease the number of denoising steps. In our experiments, the only base policy we do not reuse from DSRL is the Tool Hang checkpoint, as Tool Hang was not a task featured in the original DSRL manuscript or codebase. We thus train our own base policy, which we implement as a flow pol-icy (Black et al., 2024) with an output action horizon of size 8, where sampling is performed through 10 Euler integra-tion steps. We note that DSRL by default also works with flow policies due to their inherent deterministic sampling procedure, and can be optimized in the same manner. For experiments that integrate DF-ExpEnse with ResFiT, we reuse the same pretraining strategy as in the ResFiT manuscript to procure initial diffusion policy checkpoints. Such pretrained policies condition not only on propriocep-tion but also vision inputs from all available RGB camera views. The base policy is trained to utilize 100 denoising steps, and generates sampled action sequences of length 16. 

4.4. Default DF-ExpEnse Settings 

DF-ExpEnse relies on three components: the current policy to sample a set of action candidates, a critic ensemble to evaluate exploration interest, and the fleet to communicate and receive statistics from its peers for more group-aware, collaborative action selection. All of these components al-ready naturally occur in the DSRL framework; DF-ExpEnse simply exploits them during online inference for more prin-cipled selection of an exploratory action. By default, DSRL features a critic ensemble that is used to optimize the SAC noise selector agent. DSRL also utilizes a parallelized fleet to scale parallelized experience collection, but the vanilla setting deploys each agent independently from each other. The main hyperparameters that adjust DF-ExpEnse’s behav-ior thus pertain to these three components. Across all tasks and experiments, unless otherwise specified, we use a can-didate action sample size of 3, a critic ensemble of size 10, and a fleet size of 4. We note that DSRL by default uses a 6DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning  

> Figure 4. On the Importance of BC-SR . We demonstrate that BC-SR is a generally applicable regularization technique for augmenting the sampled action candidate set to encourage continued multimodal sampling. Removing BC-SR from DF-ExpEnse consistently decreases sample efficiency, while adding BC-SR to Max-Q significantly improves performance. All results are averages over three seeds.

fleet size of 4 for experience collection and a critic ensemble of size 2 for optimization. Whereas that may suffice for op-timization purposes; we found that when we reuse the critic ensemble during online inference through DF-ExpEnse, a larger ensemble size induced greater performance benefits. Furthermore, DF-ExpEnse utilizes BC-SR with a regular-ization amount of p = 1 for all experiments. Thus, at each timestep, the agent also considers a singular action sampled from the initial pretrained diffusion policy. In practice, be-cause DSRL does not update the underlying pretrained diffu-sion policy’s weights, this is generated by simply bypassing the learned noise selector network and directly providing a sampled Gaussian noise vector as input. Lastly, we use a critic disagreement parameter of α = 0 .5 in all experiments. 

4.5. Baseline Comparisons 

We report evaluations throughout the finetuning procedure across RoboMimic and OpenAI Gym tasks in Figure 2, where curves are visualized with mean and standard devia-tion computed from three random seeds each. We compare DF-ExpEnse against two baselines: vanilla DSRL and Max-Q, which selects the action candidate that has the highest estimated value according to the critic ensemble. This ex-ploitative technique has been explored in prior works such as EMaQ (Ghasemipour et al., 2021) and Q-Chunking (Li et al., 2026), and is equivalent to DF-ExpEnse when α = 0 . As with DF-ExpEnse, each action candidate’s value is estimated as the minimum prediction from the ensemble to avoid over-estimation. As only the Q-value is considered during action selection, applying fleet normalization is superfluous for Max-Q, and does not affect each agent’s choice. We also compare the DSRL-integrated version of DF-ExpEnse against two alternative strategies for evaluat-ing action exploration quality: Exploration via Ellipti-cal Episodic Bonuses (E3B) (Henaff et al., 2022) and Plan2Explore (Sekar et al., 2020). Neither approach has previously been applied to online reinforcement learning finetuning of pretrained behavior cloned policies; we thus apply the necessary adaptations to ensure fair comparison. Whereas vanilla E3B retroactively annotates trajectories col-lected by the policy with bonus rewards, here we implement E3B to perform action candidate selection for improved online experience collection. This online version of E3B uses a learned transition dynamics model to predict the fu-ture states associated with each action candidate; the explo-ration interest is then computed as the value estimate from the critic ensemble augmented with an Elliptical Episodic Bonus term. As the E3B authors note that the choice of continuous state representation is important, we benchmark against two versions of state encoding: learned representa-tions of robotic proprioception (E3B-State), and a pretrained DINO representation of the pixel observation (E3B-DINO). The action candidate set size is kept uniform with default DF-ExpEnse for fairness, and all underlying reinforcement learning finetuning settings are maintained for consistency. For Plan2Explore an ensemble of one-step transition dynam-ics models is used, as in the original work, to evaluate action candidates. Exploration interest for each candidate is esti-mated through the variance of predicted future states across the dynamics ensemble; the action that produces the state with the highest approximated variance is selected for execu-tion. As with E3B, candidate set size and underlying DSRL finetuning settings are kept consistent with DF-ExpEnse. Lastly, E3B and Plan2Explore both use additional model components: a transition dynamics model, and an ensemble of transition dynamics models, respectively, to evaluate actions during online experience collection. In contrast, DF-ExpEnse naturally reuses the critic ensemble needed for policy gradient optimization in an online manner, and does not require extra modules to perform principled exploration. 

RoboMimic Results: We present RoboMimic performance in the first row of Figure 2. We first observe that DF-ExpEnse achieves consistent sample efficiency improve-ments, demonstrating a higher success rate than alternative methods given the same amount of observed timesteps from the environment. We first note that on Lift, all methods achieve comparable finetuning performance; we attribute this to the simplicity of the task, being the easiest in the 7DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning  

> Figure 5. Fleet Normalization Ablation . We demonstrate across both RoboMimic and OpenAI Gym tasks that fleet normalization is a meaningful component of DF-ExpEnse, and that removing it impacts sample efficiency. All results are averages over three random seeds.

suite, as well as the high initial pretrained policy perfor-mance. For the more challenging RoboMimic tasks where base performance is lower and exploration over behaviors during experience collection may be more productive, DF-ExpEnse significantly improves over the baselines. Of note is that Max-Q underperforms against even vanilla DSRL across all the manipulation tasks. We hypothesize this arises due to Max-Q being naturally exploitative, which may re-inforce erroneous prior beliefs over behavior without ex-ploration. The modes may also converge on a suboptimal action mode that satisfies an underexplored critic ensemble, causing both quality and diversity of sampled action candi-dates to collapse. On the other hand, DF-ExpEnse includes an additional critic disagreement term, and utilizes BC-SR to regularize the action candidate space to avoid pitfalls encountered by Max-Q. We verify that each of these design decisions indeed meaningfully improves exploration and sample-efficiency during finetuning in our ablations study. As observed in Figure 2, DF-ExpEnse also consistently outperforms alternative strategies for evaluating action ex-ploration quality. State-based E3B performs the same as or worse than DINO-based E3B for all tasks. As E3B is known to be sensitive to the state encoding used, we hy-pothesize this may be because large-scale pretraining priors from DINO can be useful for certain robotic control tasks that feature more realistic visual settings. For example, the difference between E3B-State and E3B-DINO is largest for RoboMimic Lift and Can, which feature common objects such as a cube or a can; however, the difference between the two is not pronounced in environments with more syn-thetic visuals such as OpenAI Gym tasks. Meanwhile, DF-ExpEnse behavior does not depend on the quality of any state embeddings when performing principled exploration. Whereas DF-ExpEnse outperforms baselines on Tool Hang and Lift, the respective difficulty and simplicity of these tasks makes them difficult to convey the effect of adjust-ments to the method. Alternatively, both Can and Square clearly demonstrate varied performance trends across differ-ent methods; we thus utilize these tasks for subsequent abla-tions to illustrate design decisions relevant to DF-ExpEnse. 

OpenAI Gym Results: In the second row of Figure 2 we observe superior reward curve comparisons for DF-ExpEnse against the baselines, supporting our hypothesis that improv-ing exploration quality during online experience collection can directly lead to increased finetuning sample-efficiency. 

DexMimicGen Results: In Figure 3 we observe superior success-rate curve comparisons for DF-ExpEnse against the ResFiT baseline it was built on top of as well as a Max-Q action selection scheme. We thus show that DF-ExpEnse is a general and versatile exploration technique that can be seamlessly integrated with a variety of finetuning strategies. 

4.6. Behavior Cloning Sampling Regularization Matters 

A key component of DF-ExpEnse is its treatment of the mul-timodal modeling capability of the diffusion policy as an effective way to filter the continuous action space. From this perspective, we hope that samples proposed by the agent are not only of reasonable base quality, but also exhibit broad coverage of the action space. As a policy may naturally begin to converge on fewer action modes throughout fine-tuning, BC-SR is used to regularize the candidate set to include samples from the initial pretrained policy, which in-tuitively may preserve more multimodality than a policy that has further finetuned on its own online experience. We thus empirically investigate the exploration benefits of BC-SR. In Figure 4, along with existing comparisons between Max-Q and DF-ExpEnse, we report two additional settings: adding BC-SR to Max-Q and removing BC-SR from DF-ExpEnse. We discover that across all tasks, the two ablation experiments lie between the performance curves of Max-Q and DF-ExpEnse; in essence, removing BC-SR from DF-ExpEnse consistently hurts its performance, while adding BC-SR to Max-Q consistently improves it. We attribute the dramatic performance upgrade of Max-Q with BC-SR over standard Max-Q to BC-SR’s ability to mitigate the tendency Max-Q may have to rapidly collapse to a suboptimal mode given its exploitative behavior. This reinforces the important role that multimodality has in filtering the continuous action space to a set of action candidates, and highlights BC-SR as a generally helpful component during online inference. 8DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning  

> Figure 6. Studying Component Sizes . We ablate the critic ensemble size, action candidate sample size, and fleet size for the RoboMimic Can task. We find that DF-ExpEnse benefits from a larger ensemble and fleet size, and exhibits saturation with increases to the sample set.

Furthermore, as using Max-Q with BC-SR improves but does not completely reach the performance of DF-ExpEnse across all experiments, this suggests that other components of DF-ExpEnse also meaningfully contribute to improved exploration. These include scoring actions using an addi-tional critic disagreement term, and performing fleet normal-ization to contextualize action candidates across the group. 

4.7. Fleet Normalization Matters 

Cross-fleet collaboration for exploration is an underexplored but promising direction towards sample-efficient finetuning, particularly as parallelization efforts improve and real-world robotic deployments increase. In fleet settings, DF-ExpEnse enables agents to communicate statistics regarding their in-dividual action candidates with the rest of the group before action selection. Each agent then contextualizes the value and uncertainty estimates of their personal choices against the situations of all other agents, thus facilitating collabora-tion across the fleet for improved group-aware exploration. In Figure 5, we compare DF-ExpEnse with fleet normal-ization against a same-sized fleet where each parallelized DF-ExpEnse agent performs online experience collection in isolation. We verify that fleet normalization consistently improves the quality of experience collection as a group, fa-cilitating increased sample efficiency across all evaluations. 

4.8. Impact of Candidate Set Size, Ensemble Size, and Fleet Size 

We ablate size hyperparameters for the three main com-ponents that describe DF-ExpEnse’s behavior: the critic ensemble, the action candidate set, and the fleet. We report comparisons on the RoboMimic Can task against the default DF-ExpEnse setting in Figure 6, averaged over three seeds. In the first plot, we find that a larger critic ensemble helps performance; using 2 critics results in significantly de-creased sample efficiency performance. Performance ap-pears to saturate with 5 critics, which achieves comparable performance to using the default size of 10. We believe that too small an ensemble may result in a noisier estimate of the uncertainty the agent has in a given candidate action, leading to a more random selection from the candidate set. In the second plot, we compare using larger action candidate sample sizes of 5 and 7 against the default setting of 3. In all cases, we continue to apply BC-SR with a regulariza-tion size of 1. This setting evaluates to what effect seeing a larger amount of samples from the policy has on exploration. We observe that whereas there are slight improvements in utilizing a sample size of 5, the sample efficiency is ulti-mately comparable across all settings. Intuitively, we expect saturation in performance gains as we scale up the sample size past a certain extent; at sufficiently large sample sizes we expect samples to begin to represent redundant modes. In the third plot, we compare the effect that fleet size has on DF-ExpEnse performance. Intuitively, larger fleets may provide greater amounts of normalization and collaboration possibilities. We indeed observe that performance decreases with smaller fleet sizes, down to no effective fleet when only a single agent is available. Extended comparisons across fleet size settings in Appendix B also express similar trends. 

# 5. Conclusion 

We present DF-ExpEnse, an exploration technique that improves sample efficiency when finetuning a pretrained generative control policy via reinforcement learning. DF-ExpEnse evaluates the exploration interest of an action by using an ensemble of critics to estimate its value and uncer-tainty. To tractably identify an action that balances quality with uncertainty, DF-ExpEnse uses the multimodal model-ing capability of the generative control policy to produce a set of reasonable candidates. Furthermore, in fleet settings, DF-ExpEnse performs cross-fleet communication to better contextualize action selection for each agent and facilitate collaborative exploration. DF-ExpEnse can be flexibly inte-grated with multiple reinforcement learning techniques that finetune generative policies. In experiments evaluated over a variety of manipulation and locomotion tasks, we find that it consistently improves online finetuning sample-efficiency. 9DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

# Acknowledgments 

This work was done when Calvin was visiting the REALab at Stanford University, supported by the Research Mobility Fellowship from Brown University. We would like to thank Zhanyi Sun for valuable advice and technical support at notable stages of the project, Yiding Jiang for helpful discus-sions related to exploration via ensembles, and Zilai Zeng and Zitian Tang for their timely help with experimental runs. This material is partially supported by NSF IIS-2433429 and IIS-2543166, a Seed Award from Brown University, and the NVIDIA Academic Grant Program. Our research was conducted using computational resources at the Center for Computation and Visualization at Brown University. 

# Impact Statement 

This paper seeks to increase the sample efficiency of fine-tuning pretrained diffusion policies through reinforcement learning by designing an improved exploration strategy. As robotic deployments increase in the real world, this work can help to facilitate faster skill learning or refinement. At the same time this work, like many other reinforcement learning works, makes minimal assumptions about the task being optimized for, which could be a negative behavior when used by bad actors. We do not feel there are pressing societal consequences to highlight regarding our work. 

# References 

Agaskar, A., Siva, S., Pickering, W., O’Brien, K., Kekeh, C., Li, A., Sarker, B. G., Chua, A., Nemade, M., Thattai, C., et al. Deepfleet: Multi-agent foundation models for mobile robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08574 , 2025. Ankile, L., Jiang, Z., Duan, R., Shi, G., Abbeel, P., and Nagabandi, A. Residual off-policy rl for finetuning be-havior cloning policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.19301 ,2025a. Ankile, L., Simeonov, A., Shenfeld, I., Torne, M., and Agrawal, P. From imitation to refinement-residual rl for precise assembly. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 01–08. IEEE, 2025b. Auer, P., Cesa-Bianchi, N., and Fischer, P. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. Machine learning , 47(2):235–256, 2002. Bain, M. and Sammut, C. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine intelligence 15 , pp. 103–129, 1995. Black, K., Brown, N., Driess, D., Esmail, A., Equi, M., Finn, C., Fusai, N., Groom, L., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 ,2024. Brockman, G., Cheung, V., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J., Schulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W. Openai gym, 2016. Chen, R. Y., Sidor, S., Abbeel, P., and Schulman, J. Ucb exploration via q-ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.01502 , 2017. Chi, C., Xu, Z., Feng, S., Cousineau, E., Du, Y., Burchfiel, B., Tedrake, R., and Song, S. Diffusion policy: Visuomo-tor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , pp. 02783649241273668, 2023. Fujimoto, S. and Gu, S. S. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:20132–20145, 2021. Ghasemipour, S. K. S., Schuurmans, D., and Gu, S. S. Emaq: Expected-max q-learning operator for simple yet effective offline and online rl. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 3682–3691. PMLR, 2021. Goecks, V. G., Gremillion, G. M., Lawhern, V. J., Valasek, J., and Waytowich, N. R. Integrating behavior cloning and reinforcement learning for improved performance in dense and sparse reward environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04281 , 2019. Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforce-ment learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1861–1870. Pmlr, 2018. Henaff, M., Raileanu, R., Jiang, M., and Rockt ¨aschel, T. Exploration via elliptical episodic bonuses. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,2022. Herzog, A., Rao, K., Hausman, K., Lu, Y., Wohlhart, P., Yan, M., Lin, J., Arenas, M. G., Xiao, T., Kappler, D., et al. Deep rl at scale: Sorting waste in office build-ings with a fleet of mobile manipulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03270 , 2023. Hu, H., Mirchandani, S., and Sadigh, D. Imitation boot-strapped reinforcement learning. In Robotics: Science and Systems Conference , 2024. Jiang, Y., Kolter, J. Z., and Raileanu, R. On the importance of exploration for generalization in reinforcement learn-ing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:12951–12986, 2023. 10 DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

Jiang, Z., Xie, Y., Lin, K., Xu, Z., Wan, W., Mandlekar, A., Fan, L., and Zhu, Y. Dexmimicgen: Automated data generation for bimanual dexterous manipulation via imi-tation learning. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025. Kalashnikov, D., Varley, J., Chebotar, Y., Swanson, B., Jonschkowski, R., Finn, C., Levine, S., and Hausman, K. Mt-opt: Continuous multi-task robotic reinforcement learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08212 , 2021. Lee, K., Laskin, M., Srinivas, A., and Abbeel, P. Sunrise: A simple unified framework for ensemble learning in deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 6131–6141. PMLR, 2021. Li, Q., Zhou, Z., and Levine, S. Reinforcement learn-ing with action chunking. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=XUks1Y96NR .Makoviychuk, V., Wawrzyniak, L., Guo, Y., Lu, M., Storey, K., Macklin, M., Hoeller, D., Rudin, N., Allshire, A., Handa, A., et al. Isaac gym: High performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470 , 2021. Mandlekar, A., Xu, D., Wong, J., Nasiriany, S., Wang, C., Kulkarni, R., Fei-Fei, L., Savarese, S., Zhu, Y., and Mart ´ın-Mart ´ın, R. What matters in learning from of-fline human demonstrations for robot manipulation. In 

Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2021. Nair, A., Gupta, A., Dalal, M., and Levine, S. Awac: Accel-erating online reinforcement learning with offline datasets. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09359 , 2020. Nakamoto, M., Mees, O., Kumar, A., and Levine, S. Steer-ing your generalists: Improving robotic foundation mod-els via value guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13816 ,2024. Pomerleau, D. A. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. In Touretzky, D. (ed.), Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , volume 1. Morgan-Kaufmann, 1988. URL https://proceedings.neurips. cc/paper_files/paper/1988/file/ 812b4ba287f5ee0bc9d43bbf5bbe87fb-Paper. pdf .Raffin, A., Hill, A., Gleave, A., Kanervisto, A., Ernestus, M., and Dormann, N. Stable-baselines3: Reliable rein-forcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http: //jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1364.html .Ren, A. Z., Lidard, J., Ankile, L. L., Simeonov, A., Agrawal, P., Majumdar, A., Burchfiel, B., Dai, H., and Simchowitz, M. Diffusion policy policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00588 , 2024. Rudin, N., Hoeller, D., Reist, P., and Hutter, M. Learning to walk in minutes using massively parallel deep rein-forcement learning. In Conference on robot learning , pp. 91–100. PMLR, 2022. Schwall, M., Daniel, T., Victor, T., Favaro, F., and Hohnhold, H. Waymo public road safety performance data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.00038 , 2020. Sekar, R., Rybkin, O., Daniilidis, K., Abbeel, P., Hafner, D., and Pathak, D. Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In ICML , 2020. Shi, Y., Schillinger, P., Gabriel, M., Qualmann, A., Feldman, Z., Ziesche, H., and Vien, N. A. Uncertainty-driven explo-ration strategies for online grasp learning. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 781–787. IEEE, 2024. Silver, D. and Sutton, R. S. Welcome to the era of experi-ence. Google AI , 2025. Silver, T., Allen, K., Tenenbaum, J., and Kaelbling, L. Resid-ual policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06298 ,2018. Singla, J., Agarwal, A., and Pathak, D. Sapg: Split and aggregate policy gradients. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2024) , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vi-enna, Austria, July 2024. PMLR. Song, J., Meng, C., and Ermon, S. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=St1giarCHLP .Wagenmaker, A., Nakamoto, M., Zhang, Y., Park, S., Yagoub, W., Nagabandi, A., Gupta, A., and Levine, S. Steering your diffusion policy with latent space reinforce-ment learning. Conference on Robot Learning , 2025. Wang, L., Zhang, K., Zhou, A., Simchowitz, M., and Tedrake, R. Robot fleet learning via policy merging. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=IL71c1z7et .Zhao, Y., Boney, R., Ilin, A., Kannala, J., and Pajarinen, J. Adaptive behavior cloning regularization for stable offline-to-online reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13846 , 2022. 11 DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

# A. All Base Policy and DSRL Training Hyperparameters 

We provide common hyperparameter settings used in our DSRL-integrated DF-ExpEnse experiments in Tables 1, 2, and 3. When DF-ExpEnse is applied on top of DSRL as the underlying reinforcement learning algorithm of choice, it is only utilized during the online experience collection step. As such, many of the optimization hyperparameters of DSRL are untouched, to maintain base performance and attribute any performance improvements directly to the quality of experience collected through DF-ExpEnse. Of these tasks, Tool Hang is entirely new, and we thus propose the entire suite of task-related hyperparameters. Lastly, in the spirit of evaluating true sample efficiency, we do not collect any initial steps across any tasks or environments for both DSRL and DF-ExpEnse. 

Table 1. Hyperparameters for DSRL RoboMimic Experiments. Hyperparameters that deviate from the base DSRL implementation are reported with an asterisk ( *). 

Hyperparameter Lift Can Square Tool Hang *

Action chunk size 4 4 4 8*

Hidden size 2048 2048 2048 2048 *

Gradient steps per update 30 20 20 20 *

QW update steps 10 10 10 10 *

Discount factor 0.99 0.99 0.999 0.99 *

Action magnitude ( bW ) 1.5 1.5 1.5 1*

Initial steps 0* 0* 0* 0*

Critic Ensemble Size 10 * 10 * 10 * 10 *

πdp train denoising steps 20 20 100 10 *

πdp inference denoising steps 8 8 8 10 *

Table 2. Hyperparameters for DSRL OpenAI Gym Experiments. Hyperparameters that deviate from the base DSRL implementation are reported with an asterisk ( *). 

Hyperparameter Hopper-v2 Walker2D-v2 HalfCheetah-v2 

Action chunk size 4 4 4

Hidden size 2048 2048 1024 

Gradient steps per update 20 20 20 

QW update steps 10 10 10 

Discount factor 0.99 0.99 0.99 

Action magnitude ( bW ) 1.5 2.5 1.5

Initial steps 0* 0* 0*

Critic Ensemble Size 10 * 2 10 *

πdp train denoising steps 20 20 20 

πdp inference denoising steps 5 5 5

Table 3. Common DSRL Hyperparameters for Online Experiments. We do not adjust any base hyperparameters, and report the default common DSRL hyperparameters below. 

Hyperparameter Value 

Learning rate 0.0003 

Batch size 256 

Activation Tanh Target entropy 0

Target update rate ( τ ) 0.005 

Number of actor and critic layers 3

Fleet size 4

12 DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

# B. Baseline Comparisons at Varying Fleet Sizes 

To continue the investigation on fleet size from Section 4.8 and Figure 6, we report and compare the performance of baseline methods for both larger and smaller fleet sizes. Firstly we find that below a fleet size of 4, DF-ExpEnse performance does decrease, verifying that DF-ExpEnse can leverage larger fleet sizes to help improve sample efficiency. Nevertheless, DF-ExpEnse still reliably outperforms vanilla DSRL and Max-Q across all fleet sizes, large and small. Interestingly, with a fleet size of 16, the Max-Q selection algorithm completely collapses across all three seeds. These findings further reinforce DF-ExpEnse as a robust method that can be applied on top of standard reinforcement learning finetuning techniques to provide consistent sample efficiency benefits across available resource settings. Furthermore, we highlight the superiority of the design decisions behind DF-ExpEnse, in comparison to alternative action selection schemes such as Max-Q.  

> Figure 7. Comparing Varying Fleet Sizes . We ablate fleet sizes on the Can task, and report baseline comparisons over three random seeds. DF-ExpEnse consistently achieves superior sample efficiency, demonstrating its versatility across available resource settings.

# C. Critic Ensemble Size for Walker 

We note that the results for Walker reported in Figure 2 feature a critic ensemble of size 2, as also listed in Table 2, which aligns with default DSRL settings. Whereas scaling up the ensemble size to 10, as is used in all other tasks, still resulted in DF-ExpEnse achieving and maintaining a high reward for Walker, we found that vanilla DSRL with a critic ensemble of size 10 seemed to collapse when reusing the rest of the DSRL hyperparameters settings. In Section 4.5 and Figure 2 we thus showcase DF-ExpEnse on a hyperparameter setting that is selected to be amenable to the baseline; nevertheless, we still observe consistent improvement gains arise from our method. However, in order to maintain consistency across tasks when examining DF-ExpEnse settings themselves, we focus on Cheetah and Hopper when performing subsequent ablative studies. 

# D. Default UCB Value Estimation through Ensemble Means 

In evaluating the exploration interest of each action candidate, we compute the value estimate using the minimum of the ensemble (Equation 2) to avoid potential value overestimation. However, in the standard UCB approach, a mean over the ensemble is used. We perform additional ablations to experimentally investigate if this design decision impacts downstream performance. In Figure 8, across both RoboMimic and OpenAI Gym tasks, we find that using the mean achieves comparable performance with using the ensemble minimum. DF-ExpEnse is therefore robust to this particular design decision.  

> Figure 8. Ensemble Means for Value Estimation . We investigate performance across Can and Square tasks from RoboMimic and Cheetah and Hopper tasks from OpenAI Gym when using mean value estimation, averaged over three random seeds. We empirically discover that there are no substantial differences from using the ensemble minimum; DF-ExpEnse is thus robust to this design decision.

13 DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

# E. Exploration-Weighted Sampling for Action Selection 

By default, action selection in DF-ExpEnse is performed by selecting the candidate with the maximum estimated exploration interest. However, we can consider an alternative procedure which first constructs a discrete distribution over the candidates weighted by their estimated exploration interest terms, and then selects the action to execute via sampling. This is similar to the selection strategy performed in V-GPS (Nakamoto et al., 2024); however, whereas V-GPS scores actions according to value estimates alone, in this work actions are evaluated with respect to exploration interest to improve online experience collection quality. We report our findings across multiple tasks in Figure 9, and discover that exploration-weighted sampling for action selection achieves comparable performance to maximum selection. However, in the Square task, we find slight divergence in eventual performance after extended timesteps; we thus default DF-ExpEnse to utilize the maximum exploration interest selection scheme, as sampling can require additional parameters to tune such as temperature weighting and schedules to make stable. Nevertheless, DF-ExpEnse does naturally support sampling-based action selection strategies.  

> Figure 9. Exploration-Weighted Sampling for Action Selection . We investigate performance across RoboMimic and OpenAI Gym tasks when using V-GPS style sampling for action selection, averaged over three random seeds. Whereas there is largely no substantial difference from default DF-ExpEnse during initial optimization, performance for Square does appear to eventually exhibit some divergence at extended timesteps. V-GPS sampling may thus require the adjustment of additional parameters to consistently mitigate this phenomenon.

# F. Future Work and Limitations 

Currently, DF-ExpEnse performs exploration at every single timestep; however, exploration may be less necessary in certain states or given the agent’s currently mastered behaviors. For example, in a robotic insertion task, an agent may already have learned to pick up the object and move it towards the insertion goal proficiently. Then, intuitively the agent should focus on exploring around the insertion states, rather than commit further computation resources to exploring during the mastered pick-and-move behavior. In such scenarios, indiscriminately performing exploration at every timestep may be wasteful or even suboptimal compared to direct inference. Dynamically determining when to perform an exploration step in DF-ExpEnse, conditioned on an agent’s current state and learned behaviors, is thus an interesting direction to investigate. Furthermore, whereas fleet normalization provides performance benefits, in real-world deployments it may be impractical to have all agents communicate with each other due to latency and distance considerations. However, we notice in the ablations provided in Section B and Figure 7 that scaling fleet size may eventually encounter saturation in performance benefits, as there are no further substantial gains when scaling beyond a fleet size of 4 on the Can task. Thus, we can potentially split large-scale deployments into smaller clusters, and then perform fleet normalization locally within them. Investigating the effect of sharding parallel environments combined with localized fleet normalization is interesting to pursue as future work. 14 DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

# G. DF-ExpEnse Pseudocode (Noise Input Optimization) 

Algorithm 1 Diffusion-Filtered Exploration via Ensembles (DSRL-NA Integration) 

Input: Pretrained Diffusion Policy πdp , Sample Size M , Online Environments M1, ..., MN

Initialize: Noise Policy πθ , Action Critic Ensemble Qaction : [Qϕ1 , . . . Q ϕK ], Noise Critic Ensemble Qnoise :[Qψ1 , . . . Q ψK ], Empty Experience Buffer B, Empty Action Buffer A

1: repeat 

2: ▷ Generate and Evaluate Action Candidates Across Fleet 

3: A = {} 

4: for m = 1 , . . . , M do 

5: for n = 1 , . . . , N do 

6: anoise  

> m,n,t

∼ πθ (sn,t )

7: am,n,t ∼ πdp (sn,t , anoise 

> m,n,t

)

8: A ∪ { am,n,t }

9: vn,m = min ( Q(am,n,t , sn,t )) 

10: dn,m = std (Q(am,n,t , sn,t )) 

11: end for 

12: end for 

13: ▷ Compute Fleet Normalization 

14: ¯vn,m = vn,m −avg ([ v1,1,...,v N,M ])  

> std ([ v1,1,...,v N,M ])

15: ¯dn,m = dn,m −avg ([ d1,1,...,d N,M ])  

> std ([ d1,1,...,d N,M ])

16: ¯en,m = ¯ vn,m + α ∗ ¯dn,m 

17: ▷ Select Action and Execute 

18: for n = 1 , . . . , N do 

19: am⋆,n,t ← arg max 

> a∈A

[¯ e1,n , . . . , ¯eM,n ]

20: Step environment Mn with am⋆,n,t and observe reward rn,t and next state sn,t +1 

21: Add (sn,t , adp 

> m⋆,n,t

, am⋆,n,t , r n,t , sn,t +1 ) to B

22: end for 

23: ▷ Update Action Critic Ensemble, Noise Critic Ensemble, and Noise Policy 

24: Update Qϕi : min 

> ϕi

E(s,a,r, s′)∼B,a′∼πdp (s′,π θ (s′)) 

(Qϕi (s, a) − r − γ ∗ min Qaction (s′, a′)) 2

25: Update Qψi : min 

> ψi

Es∼B,ϵ∼N (0 ,I )

 (Qψi (s, ϵ) − Qϕi (s, π dp (s, ϵ))) 2 

26: Update πθ : max 

> θ

Es∼B

 min Qnoise (s, π θ (s)) 

27: until convergence 15 DF-ExpEnse: Diffusion Filtered Exploration for Sample Efficient Finetuning 

# H. DF-ExpEnse Pseudocode (Residual Optimization) 

Algorithm 2 Diffusion-Filtered Exploration via Ensembles (ResFiT Integration) 

Input: Pretrained Diffusion Policy πdp , Sample Size M , Online Environments M1, ..., MN

Initialize: Residual Policy πθ , Critic Ensemble Qϕ1 , . . . Q ϕK , Empty Experience Buffer B, Empty Action Buffer A

1: repeat 

2: ▷ Generate and Evaluate Action Candidates Across Fleet 

3: A = {} 

4: for m = 1 , . . . , M do 

5: for n = 1 , . . . , N do 

6: adp  

> m,n,t

∼ πdp (sn,t )

7: ares  

> m,n,t

∼ πθ (sn,t , adp 

> m,n,t

)

8: am,n,t = adp  

> m,n,t

+ ares 

> m,n,t

9: A ∪ { am,n,t }

10: vn,m = min ( Q(am,n,t , sn,t )) 

11: dn,m = std (Q(am,n,t , sn,t )) 

12: end for 

13: end for 

14: ▷ Compute Fleet Normalization 

15: ¯vn,m = vn,m −avg ([ v1,1,...,v N,M ])  

> std ([ v1,1,...,v N,M ])

16: ¯dn,m = dn,m −avg ([ d1,1,...,d N,M ])  

> std ([ d1,1,...,d N,M ])

17: ¯en,m = ¯ vn,m + α ∗ ¯dn,m 

18: ▷ Select Action and Execute 

19: for n = 1 , . . . , N do 

20: am⋆,n,t ← arg max 

> a∈A

[¯ e1,n , . . . , ¯eM,n ]

21: Step environment Mn with am⋆,n,t and observe reward rn,t and next state sn,t +1 

22: Add (sn,t , adp 

> m⋆,n,t

, am⋆,n,t , r n,t , sn,t +1 ) to B

23: end for 

24: ▷ Update Critic Ensemble and Residual Policy 

25: Update Qϕi : min 

> ϕi

E(s,a,r, s′)∼B, adp ′∼πdp (s′)

(Qϕi (s, a) − r − γ ∗ min Q(s′, adp ′ + πθ (s′, adp ′))) 2

26: Update πθ : max 

> θ

E(s,adp )∼B,i 

Qϕi (s, adp + πθ (s, adp )) 

27: until convergence 16