Title: Meta-Reinforcement Learning via Evolution for Multi-Objective Combinatorial Supply Chain Optimisation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22146v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:07:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Meta-Reinforcement Learning via Evolution for Multi-Objective Combinatorial Supply Chain Optimisation 

Rifny Rachman The University of Manchester, United Kingdom Bahrul Ilmi Nasution The University of Manchester, United Kingdom 

bahrul.nasution@manchester.ac.uk 

Josh Tingey Peak AI, Ltd, United Kingdom 

josh.tingey@peak.ai 

Richard Allmendinger The University of Manchester, United Kingdom 

richard.allmendinger@manchester.ac.uk 

Pradyumn Shukla The University of Manchester, United Kingdom 

pradyumn.shukla@manchester.ac.uk 

Wei Pan The University of Manchester, United Kingdom 

wei.pan@manchester.ac.uk 

Abstract ÔÇöMeta-reinforcement learning is a promising ap-proach to multi-objective optimisation because it enables rapid policy adaptation across changing environments and preference settings. However, conventional few-shot methods usually fine-tune from a single shared meta-policy, which can reduce solution diversity and limit exploration of the Pareto front, especially in high-dimensional combinatorial problems such as supply chain optimisation. We propose a population-based Meta-reinforcement learning framework that combines decomposition with evolu-tionary search in scalarisation weight space. The framework maintains a population of weight vectors, each associated with a distinct meta-policy trained through gradient-based meta-learning, and iteratively refines this population through elitist selection, crossover, and mutation guided by hypervolume and entropy contributions. We evaluate the method in a multi-objective supply chain setting with conflicting economic, envi-ronmental, and social goals, and further test its generality on standard reinforcement learning problems. The results show that the proposed approach yields more diverse, better distributed Pareto front approximations, improves cross-task adaptation, increases hypervolume by up to 32% over Meta-multi-objective reinforcement learning in the complex case, and attains the lowest average Hausdorff distance among all compared methods. 

Index Terms ÔÇöReinforcement learning, meta-learning, few-shot learning, multi-objective, combinatorial optimisation 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# MULTI-OBJECTIVE combinatorial supply chain (SC) optimisation is inherently complex, involving many interconnected facilities, routes, and competing objectives. This complexity is amplified by uncertainties, operational fluctuations, and disruptions, which require rapid, adaptive  

> Corresponding author. Email: rifny.rachman@manchester.ac.uk

decisions. Traditional methods, from classical optimisation and metaheuristics to hybrid models [1], struggle with scal-ability, adaptability, and responsiveness. More recently, multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL), which uses sequen-tial decision-making [2], has shown promise by leveraging agentÔÇôenvironment interactions for dynamic, feedback-driven learning and convergence [3], [4]. Yet, MORL methods remain computationally intensive and often overfit to specific SC configurations, making them brittle when SC structures change (e.g., fluctuating costs, demand, and network disruptions). Meta-learning offers a compelling solution by enabling models to ÔÇťlearn how to learnÔÇŁ across a distribution of SC tasks, where each task corresponds to a distinct SC configura-tion, such as varying demand patterns or network topologies. It facilitates rapid adaptation and strong generalisation [5], allowing policy reuse in previously unseen environments with minimal retraining. Unlike multi-task settings, where a sin-gle model is trained across heterogeneous problem instances sharing the same objective, multi-objective settings require simultaneously optimising conflicting criteria such as profit, emissions, and service-level (SL) inequality, and remain un-derexplored in SC contexts. Combining meta-learning with MORL (i.e., Meta-MORL) yields a flexible and scalable framework that efficiently adapts to dynamic environments while reducing computational overhead. Recent work by Rachman et al. [6] showed that Meta-MORL can match conventional MORL performance in SC settings while adapting substantially faster. However, most Meta-MORL methods use a single shared meta-policy for adaptation, which reduces solution diversity and limits explo-ration of the Pareto front (PF), especially in complex, high-

> arXiv:2606.22146v1 [cs.LG] 20 Jun 2026 2

dimensional problems requiring diverse trade-offs. We propose MERLION (Meta-Reinforcement Learning via Evolution), a population-based Meta-MORL framework in-spired by multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) such as MOEA based on decomposition (MOEA/D) [7] and Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II) [8]. MERLION initialises a population of weight vectors, each defining a scalarisation of the multi-objective space. A meta-policy is meta-trained via gradient adaptation for each weight vector. The population is then refined using fitness scores based on marginal hypervolume and entropy to capture diver-sity, optimality, and density. These scores drive evolutionary operations (i.e., mutation and crossover of weight vectors) that guide learning across task-conditioned objective regions. By decentralising learning across multiple objective neigh-bourhoods, MERLION trains diverse meta-policies specialised for different regions of the PF approximation. Fine-tuning then starts from multiple well-initialised policies that map SC states (e.g., inventory levels, outstanding orders) to actions (e.g., production and shipment quantities), improving both exploration and exploitation. This leads to more robust policy adaptation, greater diversity, and broader Pareto coverage with-out significant additional online adaptation cost. To our knowl-edge, MERLION is the first method to combine population-based evolutionary search over scalarisation weights with gradient-based meta-learning for multi-objective combinatorial SC optimisation. Our key contributions are: 1) Methodology. We propose MERLION , a population-based Meta-MORL framework that incorporates a MOEA-inspired strategy into meta-training. Unlike conventional meta-learning, which yields a single shared meta-policy, MERLION maintains and updates multiple meta-policies to enhance solution diversity, balance exploration and ex-ploitation, and enable efficient fine-tuning. During meta-training, an evolutionary procedure operates on scalarisa-tion weight vectors, followed by local perturbation during fine-tuning (Section IV-B). 2) Problem adaptation. We extend the existing multi-objective Markov decision process (MOMDP) formula-tion of the SC optimisation, specifically the SC network design and inventory management problem, to the pro-posed population-based Meta-MORL setting. In particu-lar, we adapt the formulation to support multiple meta-policies, each conditioned on a scalarisation weight vector sampled from the preference simplex, and the associated meta-training and fine-tuning procedures (Section III). 3) Theoretical analysis. We provide an analytical motivation for the use of population-based meta-policies in MER-LION. In particular, we show how maintaining multiple meta-policies can increase the probability of hypervolume improvement, and we explain how preference speciali-sation can reduce cross-preference gradient interference during meta-training (Section IV-B4). 4) Empirical evaluation and case implementation. We eval-uate MERLION on three SC problems of increasing complexity, characterised by growing action and observa-tion spaces and tighter operational constraints, mimicking our industrial partnerÔÇÖs topologies and parameter settings. These instances are representative rather than exhaustive, and we benchmark MERLION against five methods: Meta-MORL, a population-based MORL approach, and three metaheuristic baselines. We analyse the operational impact and perform an ablation study to assess robustness to parameter changes (Sections V-B and V-C). 5) Cross-domain evaluation. To assess the generalisability of MERLION, we benchmark it beyond SC problems on five commonly used artificial RL problems varying in reward, action, and observation spaces, and compare it against Meta-MORL and five MORL baselines (Section V-D). 6) Open-source benchmark framework. We extend several existing RL problems from mo-gymnasium-based en-vironments [9] and provide reusable environments for SC, enabling randomised task generation and multiple-environment sampling for meta-training and adaptation in Meta-MORL settings. In addition, we release the MERLION implementation to support reproducible eval-uation of population-based Meta-MORL methods across heterogeneous tasks. 1

Section II reviews relevant literature. Section III formu-lates the SC optimisation problem using MOMDP within a population-based Meta-MORL framework. Section IV presents our proposed method. Section V-B details our ex-periments and their results. Finally, Section VI summarises the study and outlines future research directions. II. R ELATED WORKS 

This section reviews previous work related to (i) Population-based methods for SC optimisation, (ii) evolutionary frame-works in RL, and (iii) meta-learning for MORL. 

A. Population-based Optimisation for SC Problems 

MOEAs are population-based multi-objective optimisation methods that approximate the PF by evolving a set of non-dominated solutions through selection, mutation, crossover, and elitist replacement [10], [11]. Their ability to maintain diverse trade-off solutions makes them popular for multi-objective SC optimisation, which is often NP-hard, high-dimensional, and characterised by conflicting economic, en-vironmental, and social objectives [12], [13]. Multi-objective genetic algorithm [14] uses non-dominance ranks and sharing functions, and has been applied to produc-tion planning and partner selection [15], [16], although its non-elitist design can reduce quality and diversity. NSGA-II [8] improves this through elitist non-dominated sorting and crowding distance, and remains widely used in SC network design [17]ÔÇô[19]. Strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm II (SPEA-II) [20] further emphasises elitism using dominance strength and an external archive with k-nearest-neighbour density estimation, showing competitive performance in green SC design [18]. MOEA/D [7] shifts from dominance-based selection to decomposition by solving scalar subproblems in parallel, and has performed well on large-dimensional SC network instances [21]. 

> 1The implementation is available upon acceptance. 3

Recent SC studies also adopt related Pareto-based swarm and evolutionary variants. MOPSO [22] extends particle swarm optimisation using Pareto dominance and an exter-nal repository, and has been applied to vaccine supplyÔÇô productionÔÇôdistribution planning [23]. Multi-objective grey wolf optimizer [24] similarly maintains an external archive and has been used in healthcare and vaccine SC design [23], [25]. NSGA-III [26] extends NSGA-II with reference-point-based niching for many-objective settings, and has been com-bined with sparrow search for green SC coordination [27]. Nevertheless, NSGA-II remains an appropriate main evolu-tionary benchmark in this study: beyond its wide adoption and interpretability, empirical evidence suggests it consistently delivers competitive PF approximations in large-dimensional SC problems [19], [28], making it a robust and directly comparable baseline for our three-objective SC settings. 

B. Evolutionary Framework in RL 

Evolutionary reinforcement learning (ERL) combines gradient-based policy optimisation with population-based evo-lutionary search, leveraging evolutionary operators to improve exploration, diversity, and robustness while retaining the learn-ing efficiency of policy gradients [29]. Recent work has extended ERL to multi-objective settings. For example, multi-objective cooperative evolutionary deep reinforcement learning [30] integrates deep RL, evolutionary search, Pareto archives, and hypervolume-based optimisation to improve convergence and diversity. Other studies com-bine evolutionary search with policy-gradient RL for multi-objective load balancing [31], integrate Q-learning into multi-objective differential evolution for feature selection [32], and employ population-based training to generate behaviour-diverse game agents that outperform conventional RL base-lines [33]. Related work has also incorporated evolutionary search into PPO to improve safety and policy stability [34]. Despite these advances, ERL remains relatively under-explored for SC optimisation. Existing examples include the combination of RL with MOEA for inventory manage-ment [35] and the integration of a genetic algorithm with Q-learning to support interpretable SC decision-making [36]. Moreover, most ERL studies focus on optimising policy popu-lations within a fixed problem setting and do not address rapid adaptation across varying network structures, operational con-ditions, and stakeholder preferences that characterise practical SC environments. 

C. Meta-Learning for RL 

MORL methods can be effective but often require extensive interaction data and retraining when deployed in new or shifting environments. In SC contexts, where disruptions and parameter changes are common, this limits practicality. Meta-learning addresses this by learning a transferable initialisation across a task distribution, enabling rapid adaptation with few samples. The early foundations were discussed by [37] and later formalised in learning-to-learn frameworks [38]. Unlike conventional deep learning, meta-learning targets generali-sation from limited task samples, supporting settings with constrained data and compute [39], [40]. Meta-RL combines meta-learning with RL by optimising meta-parameters during an outer loop (meta-training) while adapting a base policy within the inner loop. Fast RL via slow RL (RL 2) [41] performs inner-loop adaptation using an RNN that conditions on past states, actions, and rewards, enabling within-episode adaptation under partial observability. In contrast, model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) [5] learns an initialisation that can be adapted to a task with a small number of gradient steps. MAML typically provides stronger cross-task generalisation (including to unseen tasks), whereas RL 2 can be more sample-efficient within the inner loop due to its recurrent memory. 

D. Meta-MORL Framework 

To extend Meta-RL to multi-objective optimisation, [42] proposed Meta-MORL, which samples preference weight vec-tors to scalarise objectives during inner-loop adaptation and updates a meta-policy across tasks in the outer loop. At deployment, fine-tuning under multiple weights generates a PF approximation set. However, PF quality depends heavily on task and weight sampling, and diversity is not explicitly encouraged. To improve weight selection, PG-MORL [43] uses a pre-diction model to select weights expected to improve the PF, although the resulting policy updates are not directly incorporated into the meta-policy. Beyond weight selection, [44] combines Reptile and generalised policy improvement (GPI) to support few-shot adaptation, where a policy adapts to a new task using only a small number of interactions or gradient updates. Similarly, [45] applies MAML-based Meta-MORL to vehicular networks by decomposing a task into subproblems and learning an initialisation that can be rapidly fine-tuned. Overall, Meta-MORL can efficiently generate multiple trade-off solutions through fine-tuning, but most approaches rely on a single meta-policy and prioritise rapid adaptation over diversity preservation. As a result, PF coverage may be limited, particularly in complex problems. Moreover, existing Meta-MORL studies focus primarily on continuous-control and communication-network domains, with limited attention to combinatorial optimisation problems such as SC network design. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work combines population-based evolutionary search with meta-learning for multi-objective SC optimisation, despite the need for both diverse Pareto solutions and rapid adaptation to changing operating conditions and preferences. III. P ROBLEM DEFINITION 

We model the combinatorial SC optimisation problem as a finite-horizon MOMDP [46]. In standard RL, an agent learns a policy ¤Ç╬Ş (at|st) that maximises the expected cumulative reward obtained through interactions with an environment. The underlying Markov decision process is defined by the tuple 

ÔčĘS , A, ST, ╬│, ╬╝, R Ôčę, where S denotes the state space, A the action space, ST : S ├Ś A Ôćĺ S the state transition function, 

╬│ Ôłł [0 , 1] the discount factor, ╬╝ the initial-state distribution, and R a scalar reward function. 4

In MORL, the scalar reward is replaced by a vector-valued reward function R : S ├Ś A Ôćĺ RB representing B

potentially conflicting objectives. The resulting MOMDP is defined by the tuple ÔčĘS , A, ST, ╬│, ╬╝, RÔčę. In our SC setting, the objectives correspond to profit, emissions, and SL inequality. A scalarisation weight vector w Ôłł ÔłćBÔłĺ1, where 

ÔłćBÔłĺ1 =

(

w Ôłł RB : wb Ôëą 0,

> B

X

> b=1

wb = 1 

)

, (1) denotes the (B Ôłĺ 1) -dimensional simplex. The weight vector converts the reward vector into a scalar objective, enabling exploration of different trade-offs among objectives. Meta-MORL extends MORL by learning across a distri-bution of tasks rather than a single environment. A task T

corresponds to a specific SC instance, such as a particular network configuration, demand profile, or operating condition. Within a task, different scalarisation weight vectors define preference-specific optimisation subproblems. For example, two subproblems may optimise the same SC network while prioritising profit and sustainability differently. Meta-training aims to learn policy initialisations that can rapidly adapt to new tasks and preferences. In conventional Meta-MORL, meta-training is organised over a set of subtasks. We use subtask as a generic adap-tation unit because it may correspond to a task instance, a scalarisation preference, or both. In MERLION, this decom-position is made explicit: i indexes scalarisation subproblems (equivalently, population members), j indexes sampled tasks, and t indexes time steps within an episode of horizon T .To generalise across a distribution of SC tasks, we adopt a gradient-based Meta-RL framework that learns a set of initial policy parameterisations ╬Şi for rapid adaptation. During meta-training, each scalarisation subproblem i is associated with a weight vector wi Ôłł ÔłćBÔłĺ1 and is trained on its own batch of sampled tasks {T ij }Jj=1 , where 

Tij = ÔčĘS , A, ST ij , ╬│, ╬╝ ij , Rij Ôčę Ôł╝ p(T ). (2) Here, ST ij , ╬╝ij , and Rij denote the transition dynamics, initial-state distribution, and vector reward function of task instance Tij , respectively. For task j, the realised vector reward at time step t is 

rijt = Rij (sijt , aijt ), (3) where sijt Ôłł S and aijt Ôłł A denote the state and action visited under subproblem i on task j at time step t. For the SC problem, we define 

rijt = {Profit t, ÔłĺEmission t, ÔłĺInequality t} ┬Ě ¤üt, (4) where objectives to be minimised are sign-flipped, and ¤üt

is a penalty applied whenever inventory falls below zero (see Eq. 49 in Appendix A). All objectives are normalised to 

[0 , 1] to ensure comparable learning signals across objectives. The agent learns task-adapted policies ¤Ç╬ŞÔÇ▓ 

> ij

(aijt | sijt ) that approximate the PF in terms of expected cumulative vector returns. For clarity, the detailed SC formulations adopted from [4] are restated in Appendix A. Following Finn et al. [5], we define a scalarised RL loss for each taskÔÇôweight pair Tij as 

LTij (¤Ç╬Şi ) = ÔłĺEDij Ôł╝¤Ç╬Şi , ╬╝ Tij 

"T Ôłĺ1X

> t=0

╬│twÔŐĄ 

> i

rijt 

#

, (5) where Dij denotes a trajectory collected on task Tij under policy ¤Ç╬Şi and scalarisation weight vector wi.IV. M ETHODS 

MOEA-based methods use population-based parallel search to explore the search space efficiently and generate diverse solutions. This helps overcome the limitation of typical Meta-MORL methods, whose search space is often restricted to local regions [47]. This section presents the existing Meta-MORL algorithm and its integration with MOEA for parallel search. 

A. Background 

MERLION builds on three foundations: MAMLÔÇÖs innerÔÇô outer optimisation principle, Meta-MORLÔÇÖs preference-conditioned adaptation, and evolutionary search in the scalari-sation weight space [5], [42]. We first recall the standard def-initions of dominance, nondominated sets, and hypervolume that underpin both the evolutionary fitness score and the per-formance metrics used throughout this work. These definitions are also used in the analytical motivation in Section IV-B4. 

Definition 1. For u, v Ôłł RB , we say that u weakly domi-nates v (denoted u Ô¬░ v) if ub Ôëą vb, ÔłÇb Ôłł { 1, . . . , B }.

Definition 2. We say that u dominates v (denoted u Ôë╗ v) if 

u Ô¬░ v and Ôłâb Ôłł { 1, . . . , B } such that ub > v b.

Definition 3. For a finite solution set H ÔŐé RB , let N D (┬Ě)

denote nondominated subset, so that: 

N D (H) := {x Ôłł H | Ôłä h Ôłł H such that h Ôë╗ x} . (6) 

Definition 4. The region weakly dominated by H is defined as 

Dom( H) := x Ôłł RB Ôłâ h Ôłł H such that h Ô¬░ x . (7) 

Definition 5. Fix a reference point xref Ôłł RB that is dom-inated by all attainable objective vectors. The hypervolume (HV ) of a set H ÔŐé RB is defined as the B-dimensional volume, i.e. the Lebesgue measure ╬Ż(┬Ě), of the region weakly dominated by the nondominated points in H relative to xref ,which is calculated by: 

HV (H; xref ) = ╬Ż

´úź´úş [

> xÔłłN D (H)

[xref , x]

´úÂ´úŞ , (8) where 

[xref , x] := 

> B

Y

> b=1

[xref  

> b

, x b]. (9) 5

1) Meta-MORL for SC Optimisation: Let Ty Ôł╝ p(T )

denote a task sampled from a task distribution, ¤Ç╬Ş a policy parameterised by ╬Ş, and wy Ôłł ÔłćBÔłĺ1 a scalarisation weight vector for B objectives, where ╬│ Ôłł [0 , 1] is the discount factor and ryt is the vector reward at time t. The expected scalarised discounted return on task Ty is 

J(╬Ş; Ty , wy ) = E¤Ç╬Ş ,Ty

"T Ôłĺ1X

> t=0

╬│twÔŐĄ 

> y

ryt 

#

, (10) with corresponding RL loss 

LTy ,wy (¤Ç╬Ş ) = ÔłĺJ(╬Ş; Ty , wy ). (11) MAML [5] learns an initialisation ╬Ş that adapts quickly via a small number of inner gradient steps. Chen et al. [42] extended this to MORL by treating each taskÔÇôpreference pair 

(T , w) as a scalarised subproblem, so that meta-training seeks an initialisation that adapts efficiently across both task and preference variation. At deployment, each meta-parameter ╬Şi is fine-tuned in-dependently on a new, unseen task T new . For each ╬Şi, a set of M local scalarisation weight vectors {wim }Mm=1 is constructed around its associated preference vector. Starting from ╬Şi, independent fine-tuning under each wim produces 

M preference-conditioned adapted policies {╬ŞÔÇ▓

> im

}Mm=1 . Since Pareto optimality is defined in the original multi-objective space, each adapted policy is evaluated by its expected dis-counted vector return: 

F(╬ŞÔÇ▓

> im

; T new ) = E¤Ç╬ŞÔÇ▓  

> im ,Tnew

"T Ôłĺ1X

> t=0

╬│trt

#

Ôłł RB . (12) The PF approximation bP is then obtained by extracting the nondominated subset of these vector returns. Hence, conven-tional Meta-MORL learns a single good starting point for preference-conditioned adaptation rather than directly learning a diverse Pareto set during meta-training. 

2) MOEA-inspired Techniques: MOEAs maintain a pop-ulation of candidate solutions and refine it through three operators [8], [14], [20]: (i) selection , which favours indi-viduals by fitness or rank; (ii) crossover , which recombines two parents, for weight vectors on the simplex, arithmetic crossover ╦ťz = ╬╗zi +(1 Ôłĺ╬╗)zh (╬╗ Ôłł [0 , 1] ) preserves feasibility; and (iii) mutation , which adds random perturbations ╦ćz = ╦ť z+¤Á,

¤Á Ôł╝ Mmut , to maintain exploration. Almost all MOEAs also apply elitist replacement , retaining the best individuals from the combined parentÔÇôoffspring pool. In MERLION, these operators act directly in the scalarisation weight space, driving the preference distribution toward better convergence and broader Pareto coverage. 

B. Proposed Algorithm: MERLION 

In this study, we propose MERLION, an evolutionary Meta-MORL framework that maintains a population of meta-policies and updates them through two coupled processes. Policy parameters are learned via gradient-based meta-updates (in the spirit of MAML), while evolutionary operators act in the weight space to adapt the preference vectors that condition each meta-policy. This co-evolution of weights and meta-policies aims to encourage both convergence and diverse coverage of the trade-off surface. Our proposed MERLION algorithm consists of three pri-mary stages: meta-training, evolutionary procedure, and fine-tuning phase. In meta-training, the Meta-MORL framework is predominantly used with an extension into a population-based strategy. For the evolutionary procedure, an MOEA-based strategy is used, and the fine-tuning phase adopts actor-critic RL with modifications to align with the evolutionary framework. 

1) Meta-training: Algorithm 1 is initialised with P meta-parameters {╬Şi}Pi=1 and a corresponding set of weight vec-tors {wi}Pi=1 sampled uniformly from the simplex ÔłćBÔłĺ1,ensuring broad initial coverage of the preference space. An empty archive is also created to store meta-parameters and their associated weight vectors throughout training. Each pair 

(╬Şi, wi) defines a scalarised subproblem, where ╬Şi is the meta-parameter specialised for preference region wi and serves as the initialisation point for fast adaptation under that preference. For each subproblem i, a batch of tasks {T ij }Jj=1 is sampled from p(T ) and trajectories Dij are collected under ¤Ç╬Şi . These trajectories are used to compute the inner adaptation update: 

╬ŞÔÇ▓ 

> ij

= ╬Şi Ôłĺ ╬▒Ôłç╬Şi LTij (¤Ç╬Şi ), (13) where ╬▒ is the inner-loop step size and ╬ŞÔÇ▓ 

> ij

is the task-adapted parameter for task Tij under subproblem i. In this study, our meta-objective for each ╬Şi is as follows: 

min 

> ╬Şi

X  

> Tij Ôł╝p(T)

LTij (¤Ç╬ŞÔÇ▓ 

> ij

) = X  

> Tij Ôł╝p(T)

LTij (¤Ç╬ŞiÔłĺ╬▒Ôłç╬Şi LTij (¤Ç╬Şi )).

(14) After completion of the adaptation on the batch of tasks, each meta-parameter ╬Şi is further updated in the meta-learning phase using the DÔÇ▓ 

> ij

that uses ¤Ç╬ŞÔÇ▓ 

> ij

. The meta-parameters ╬Şi are calculated based on the aggregated post-adaptation losses over scalarised tasks Tij drawn from p(T ). Hence, the meta-policy update that considers the meta step size ╬▓ follows: 

╬Şi ÔćÉ ╬Şi Ôłĺ ╬▓Ôłç╬Şi

> J

X

> j=1

LTij (¤Ç╬ŞÔÇ▓ 

> ij

). (15) Once all meta-policies ¤Ç╬Şi associated with the weight vectors 

wi are updated, the pairs (╬Şi, wi) are stored in the archive 

to perform the evolutionary update in the next stage. 

2) Evolutionary Procedure: In Meta-MORL, each meta-policy is associated with a fixed scalarisation weight vector generated during meta-training, with no mechanism to re-fine the preference distribution over time. In MERLION, we propose to apply MOEA-inspired operators to these weight vectors so that the preference distribution evolves across generations toward better convergence and broader coverage of the trade-off space. After each meta-update, the archive stores a population of tuples (╬Şi, wi), where ╬Şi denotes the meta-parameters and wi denotes the associated scalarisation weight vector. Following Algorithm 2, MERLION first evaluates the current population using a scalar fitness score, then generates P6

Algorithm 1 Meta-training phase of MERLION (population-based meta-learning). 

Require: population size P , task distribution p(T ), weight distribution p(w), step sizes ╬▒, ╬▓ 

1: Initialise: meta-parameters {╬Şi}Pi=1 , weights {wi Ôł╝

p(w)}Pi=1 , archive ÔćÉ Ôłů 

2: while not done do 

3: for i = 1 , 2, . . . , P do 

4: Sample a batch of tasks {T ij }Jj=1 Ôł╝ p(T )

5: for j = 1 , 2, . . . , J do 

6: Collect trajectories Dij using ¤Ç╬Şi on task Tij with weight wi

7: Compute inner loss LTij (¤Ç╬Şi ) from Dij 

8: Inner adaptation update, see Eq. (13) 

9: Collect trajectories DÔÇ▓ 

> ij

using ¤Ç╬ŞÔÇ▓ 

> ij

on task Tij with weight wi

10: end for 

11: Meta-update, see Eq. (15) 

12: archive ÔćÉ Update (archive , (╬Şi, wi)) 

13: end for 

14: archive ÔćÉ EvolveWeights (archive )

15: end while 

16: 17: return archive containing {(╬Şi, wi)}Pi=1 S0 S1 ST...                 

> episode
> S0S1ST...
> episode
> ...
> A batch of task inner adaptation
> S0S1ST...
> episode
> S0S1ST...
> episode
> ...
> S0S1ST...
> episode
> S0S1ST...
> episode
> ...
> S0S1ST...
> episode
> S0S1ST...
> episode
> ...
> ...
> Meta-update Meta-update
> Repeated inner adaptation over
> and
> Meta-updated
> ...
> ...
> Evolution after meta-update for all
> at each meta-iteration
> Meta-updated
> A batch of task inner adaptation
> A batch of task inner adaptation
> A batch of task inner adaptation
> meta-iteration 1 final meta-iteration

Fig. 1: Meta-training and adaptation phases in MERLION as given in Algorithm 1. Initial meta-policies ╬Şi are trained independently in the inner adaptation phase using wi on a batch of tasks Tij . Outer meta-update applies to each ╬Şi with the evolutionary procedure to all wi after each meta-iteration. offspring through selection, crossover or mutation, assigns each offspring the meta-parameters of the fitter parent, and finally recomputes fitness over the combined parent-offspring population before retaining the top P individuals. In this way, the evolutionary routine updates the weight vectors while preserving strong solutions through elitist survival selection. 

a) Selection: We adopt rank-based parent selection over a scalar fitness score that combines convergence and diversity. Let ri Ôłł RB denote the objective vector associated with individual i, and let wi denote its scalarisation weight vector. The fitness of individual i is defined as 

Qi = ╬║ ÔłćHV i + (1 Ôłĺ ╬║) Ôłć Ei, (16) where fitness-mixing coefficient ╬║ Ôłł [0 , 1] balances conver-gence and diversity. The convergence term is the marginal hypervolume contribution in objective space, 

ÔłćHV i = HV (H) Ôłĺ HV (H \ { ri}) , (17) where H = {r1, . . . , rP } is the set of population objective vectors. The diversity term is computed from an average log-distance score in the weight space, 

ÔłćEi = 1

P Ôłĺ 1

X

> h╠Ş=i

log( Ôłąwi Ôłĺ whÔłą2 + ¤Á) , (18) where ¤Á > 0 is a small constant for numerical stability. While marginal hypervolume contribution is a standard MOEA metric [8], its combination with a weight-space diversity term in Eq. (16) is specific to MERLION, as it jointly accounts for objective-space quality and preference-space coverage during meta-training. After computing {Qi}Pi=1 , parent-i is selected according to rank-based probabilities. Let ¤äi Ôłł { 0, . . . , P Ôłĺ 1} denote the rank of individual i after sorting in descending order of Qi,where ¤äi = 0 is the best rank. Then parent-i is sampled with probability 

psel (i) = P Ôłĺ ¤äi

PPh=1 (P Ôłĺ ¤äh) . (19) This gives higher-fitness individuals a greater chance of reproduction while maintaining stochasticity in the search. After P offspring are generated and added to the archive ,MERLION recomputes fitness scores on the combined parent-offspring population and retains the top P individuals via elitist survival selection. 

b) Crossover: After selecting parent-i, MERLION chooses the second parent as the farthest weight vector from 

wi in Euclidean space: 

wh = arg max    

> wkÔłłW ,wk╠Ş=wi

Ôłąwi Ôłĺ wkÔłą2, (20) where W denotes the current population of weight vec-tors. This departs from standard nearest-neighbour mating used in decomposition-based MOEAs [7] and instead pro-motes recombination across well-separated preference regions, thereby encouraging broader coverage of trade-off directions. Crossover is then applied with probability ╬Ěcross using arith-metic interpolation, which preserves feasibility on the simplex: 

wchild = ╬╗wi + (1 Ôłĺ ╬╗)wh, ╬╗ Ôł╝ Uniform(0 , 1) . (21) Arithmetic crossover generates offspring as convex combi-nations of parent preferences, thereby preserving feasibility without requiring repair operators and naturally interpolating between neighbouring trade-off directions. The offspring in-herits the meta-parameters of the fitter parent according to the fitness score Q.7

c) Mutation: If crossover is not applied, the offspring is generated through mutation. The selected parent weight vector is perturbed by additive uniform noise, 

╦ťwchild = wi + ¤Á, ¤Á Ôł╝ Uniform( Ôłĺ╬┤, ╬┤ )B , (22) where ╬┤ > 0 controls the mutation strength. The perturbed vector is then repaired by clipping negative components and renormalising to satisfy simplex constraints: 

wchild = max( ╦ť wchild , 0) 

PBb=1 max( ╦ť wchild ,b , 0) . (23) As in the crossover case, the offspring inherits the meta-parameters of the fitter parent before being inserted into the 

archive .

d) Operator design in the weight space: In MERLION, evolutionary search acts in the scalarisation weight space, while policy parameters are updated by gradient-based meta-learning. Each meta-policy is paired with a weight vector that conditions scalarisation of the vector reward before PPO-style optimisation. Because near-duplicate offspring in weight space provide little additional coverage of the preference simplex, each offspring is generated by exactly one operator: arithmetic crossover with probability ╬Ěcross , and mutation otherwise, i.e., 

╬Ěmut = 1 Ôłĺ ╬Ěcross .This complementary scheme reduces operator control to a single explorationÔÇôexploitation parameter: larger ╬Ěcross favours exploitation by recombining existing trade-offs, whereas smaller ╬Ěcross favours exploration by allowing mutation to discover new preference regions. Importantly, local improve-ment in policy space is not lost: after each evolutionary step, gradient-based meta-updates refine each ╬Şi under its updated 

wi, providing implicit exploitation in policy space. Additional local exploitation is performed explicitly during fine-tuning, where local weight perturbations around each archived wi

are followed by independent gradient-based policy updates, ensuring that exploration in preference space is always coupled with policy-level exploitation. 

3) Fine-tuning: After meta-training, the archive contains a population of meta-policies and their associated scalarisation weight vectors, {(╬Şi, wi)}Pi=1 . Fine-tuning is then performed independently for each meta-policy on a target task, as shown in Algorithm 3. To improve local coverage during fine-tuning, MERLION applies local perturbations around each archived weight vector. For every archived pair (╬Şi, wi), we construct a local weight set consisting of the original weight vector wi and 

M perturbed weight vectors sampled from its neighbourhood using perturbation scale ╬┤pert . Let ╬Şim denote the policy parameters obtained after fine-tuning the i-th archived meta-policy under local weight wim , and let its evaluated vector return on the target task T new be 

rim := F (╬Şim ; T new ) = E¤Ç╬Şim , T new 

"T Ôłĺ1X

> t=0

╬│trt

#

Ôłł RB .

(24) Each perturbed weight is projected back onto the simplex before use. For each local weight vector, the corresponding archived meta-policy is loaded and used to initialise an inde-pendent fine-tuning run. Then a fresh policy is trained under 

Algorithm 2 Evolutionary procedure in MERLION 

Require: archive , population size P , crossover probability 

╬Ěcross , mutation strength ╬┤, fitness-mixing coefficient ╬║ 

> 1:

Extract {(╬Şi, wi)} and compute fitness scores {Q i}Pi=1 

from archive  

> 2:

for offspring = 1 , . . . , P do  

> 3:

Select parent 1: (╬Şi, wi) with rank-based selection ac-cording to {Q i}Pi=1  

> 4:

Select parent 2: (╬Şh, wh) using distance-aware mating using Eq. (20)  

> 5:

if rand() < ╬Ě cross then  

> 6:

Perform crossover to obtain wchild using Eq. (21)  

> 7:

else  

> 8:

Apply mutation to wchild using Eq. (22)  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

╬Şchild = ╬Şi if Qi Ôëą Q h, else ╬Şh 

> 11:

Add (╬Şchild , wchild ) to archive  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Recompute Q for all individuals in archive  

> 14:

Retain the P individuals with the highest Q in archive  

> 15: 16:

return updated archive 

the selected scalarisation weight for a fixed fine-tuning budget, with periodic evaluation every fixed number of environment steps, resulting in K fine-tuning intervals. After all local fine-tuning runs have been completed, non-dominated sorting is applied to the collected candidate solutions to obtain the final PF approximation. In this way, fine-tuning preserves the good initialisations learned during meta-training while increasing the density of candidate solutions around promising preference regions. 

Algorithm 3 Fine-tuning phase in MERLION 

Require: archive containing {(╬Şi, wi)}Pi=1 , fine-tuning in-tervals K, local perturbation strength ╬┤pert , local pertur-bation size per meta-policy M 

> 1:

Initialise candidates ÔćÉ Ôłů  

> 2:

for i = 1 , 2, . . . , P do  

> 3:

Construct local weight set Wi ÔćÉ { wi} Ôł¬ { wim }Mm=1  

> 4:

for all wim Ôłł W i do  

> 5:

if wim ╠Ş = wi then  

> 6:

wim ÔćÉ wi+¤Áim , ¤Áim Ôł╝ Uniform( Ôłĺ╬┤pert , ╬┤ pert )B 

> 7:

Repair wim using Eq. (23)  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

Clone meta-parameters: ╬Şim ÔćÉ ╬Şi 

> 10:

for k = 1 , 2, . . . , K do  

> 11:

Update ¤Ç╬Şim under wim  

> 12:

Evaluate updated ¤Ç╬Şim and record rim  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

Add final (╬Şim , wim , rim ) to candidates  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

PF ÔćÉ NonDominated (candidates ) 

> 18: 19:

return fine-tuned solution set PF 8f1     

> f2
> (a) Meta-Learning and adaptation trajectory f1
> f2
> more diverse (b) Evolutionary effect on task-adapted policies f1
> f2(c) Fine-tuning with local perturbation

Fig. 2: Meta-policies and task-adapted policies movement along the training. Subfig. 2a shows the population-based meta-policy trajectories (black lines) that are independent to each other, where each meta-policy is adapted to a batch of tasks (dotted blue lines) for next meta-update. Subfig. 2b shows the evolving weights (i.e., w1 and w2 become wÔÇ▓ 

> 1

and wÔÇ▓

> 2

) tend to encourage solutions to move away. Subfig 2c shows local perturbation in fine-tuning phase, followed with non-dominated sorting to form PF approximation (solutions that are crossed by dotted red line). 

4) Analytical Motivation for the Population-based Meta-Policies: We provide a simple analytical motivation for MER-LIONÔÇÖs population-based design. Rather than giving a full convergence guarantee, we relate multiple meta-policies to standard hypervolume properties (see Definitions 1 to 5) and to a plausible optimisation mechanism under conflicting pref-erences. Under limited fine-tuning steps, conventional meta-learning methods may produce concentrated solution sets, as adaptation tends to explore only a narrow portion of the objec-tive space. Such concentration restricts the coverage of the PF and can reduce the resulting improvement in hypervolume. To formalise this, we ground the argument in two standard properties of the hypervolume indicator: its monotonicity under set expansion and the strict gain it yields when a nondominated point is added. These properties are important because they allow us to reason about when and why adding more diverse candidates to an archive is guaranteed to improve solution quality, providing a theoretical basis for MERLIONÔÇÖs population-based design. We now introduce two standard lemmas that characterise the monotonic behaviour [48] (Lemma 1) and gain [49] (Lemma 2) of hypervolume under set expansion. These lem-mas do not yet depend on the specifics of MERLION, but they provide the basic foundation for interpreting how archive updates may affect hypervolume. We refer the reader to the original source for the full proof. 

Lemma 1. The monotonicity occurs if K ÔŐć H , then 

HV (K; xref ) ÔëĄ HV (H; xref ). (25) 

Proof. See Appendix B-A. 

Lemma 2. A new nondominated point yields a strict hyper-volume gain. Let H be any finite set, and let x /Ôłł Dom( H),i.e., x is not dominated by any point in H. Assume further that x is strictly better than the reference point xref in every objective. Then 

HV (H Ôł¬ { x}; xref ) = HV (H; xref ) + Ôłć HV (x | H ), (26) with 

ÔłćHV (x | H ) > 0. (27) 

Proof. See Appendix B-B. Lemmas 1 and 2 are generic properties of hypervolume and do not yet depend on the specifics of MERLION. To relate them to our population-based setting, we next formalise the event that a newly generated candidate improves the current archive. 

a) Population advantage via improvement probability: 

Assumptions in MERLION. To keep the discussion trans-parent, we used the following assumptions to interpret why a population of meta-policies {╬Şi}Pi=1 (each paired with a scalar-isation weight wi) is intended to yield higher hypervolume than a single meta-policy. (A1) Fixed reference point and direction. Maximisation is used for all objectives and the reference point xref is fixed. (A2) Nondominated retention (archive/elitist retention). Eval-uations are retained in an external nondominated archive or, equivalently, the procedure does not discard previ-ously found nondominated objective vectors. In partic-ular, for any current archive H and newly evaluated set 

K, the retained set includes N D (H Ôł¬ K ).(A3) Preference diversity. The population weights {wi}Pi=1 

are sufficiently spread over the simplex (i.e., not all concentrated around a single preference), so that the resulting candidates are not perfectly correlated. (A4) Non-trivial objective conflict. There exist weights 

wj , wk such that their induced update directions can disagree. 9

These assumptions aim to interpret the role of population-based search in our setting. On the other hand, since Lemma 2 implies that a strict hypervolume gain occurs whenever a generated candidate is not dominated by the retained archive, we define the corresponding archive-improvement event as follows. 

Definition 6. Let H denote the current retained set (archive), and let 

K(P ) = {x1, . . . , xP }, xi := f (╬Şi), (28) be the P candidate objective vectors produced by P meta-policies, where ╬Şi is associated with the preference vector wi.Define the archive-improvement event 

Xi := {xi /Ôłł Dom( H)}. (29) Thus, Xi denotes the event that candidate i is not weakly dominated by the current archive H and therefore improves the retained set. Consequently, SPi=1 Xi denotes the event that at least one candidate improves the archive, while Xci denotes the event that candidate i does not improve the archive. 

Proposition 1 (Population improvement probability) . Let 

X1, . . . , X P be the archive-improvement events defined above. Suppose these events are independent and satisfy Pr( Xi) Ôëą ¤ü

for all i, where ¤ü Ôłł (0 , 1) . Then 

Pr 

> P

[

> i=1

Xi

!

= 1 Ôłĺ Pr 

> P

\

> i=1

Xci

!

Ôëą 1 Ôłĺ (1 Ôłĺ ¤ü)P . (30) Moreover, for P = 1 ,

Pr( any improvement ) = Pr( X1) Ôëą ¤ü, (31) whereas for P > 1,

Pr( any improvement ) Ôëą 1 Ôłĺ (1 Ôłĺ ¤ü)P > ¤ü. (32) 

Proof. See Appendix B-C. 

Interpretation. Under independence, the probability that at least one candidate improves the archive increases with the population size. Together with Lemma 1, Lemma 2, and Assumption (A2), this suggests that a population of meta-policies may be more likely than a single meta-policy to produce a strict hypervolume increase. However, this argument does not explain why different meta-policies should generate complementary rather than redundant candidates. We therefore next consider how preference specialisation may reduce cross-preference gradient interference. 

b) Why specialisation helps: When a single shared meta-policy is trained across heterogeneous preference vectors, the resulting gradients may interfere. By contrast, assigning different preferences to different meta-policies allows each member of the population to specialise, which may reduce cross-preference gradient cancellation. Given a task T , let F(╬Ş, T ) Ôłł RB denote the expected dis-counted vector return induced by policy ¤Ç╬Ş . For a scalarisation weight vector w Ôłł ÔłćBÔłĺ1, define the scalarised objective 

J(╬Ş; T , w) := wÔŐĄF(╬Ş, T ), g(╬Ş; T , w) := Ôłç╬Ş J(╬Ş; T , w).

(33) A single meta-policy trained to serve multiple preferences drawn from a distribution p(w) therefore follows 

Ôłç╬Ş EwÔł╝p(w)[J(╬Ş; T , w)] = EwÔł╝p(w)[g(╬Ş; T , w)] . (34) Let gj := g(╬Ş; T , w(j)) and gk := g(╬Ş; T , w(k)).By using the above information, we can formalise the specialisation using Proposition 2. 

Proposition 2 (gradient interference) . If two preferences 

w(j), w(k) Ôłł ÔłćBÔłĺ1 induce conflicting gradients: 

gÔŐĄ 

> j

gk < 0, (35) then gradient conflict implies cancellation in the combined direction. 

Ôłągj + gkÔłą2 = Ôłągj Ôłą2 + ÔłągkÔłą2 + 2 gÔŐĄ 

> j

gk

< Ôłągj Ôłą2 + ÔłągkÔłą2. (36) In contrast, a population {╬Şi}Pi=1 can specialise updates by assigning one preference vector wi to each meta-policy: 

╬Şi ÔćÉ ╬Şi + ╬▓ g (╬Şi; T , wi), i = 1 , . . . , P. (37) Equivalently, since LT ,w(¤Ç╬Ş ) = ÔłĺJ(╬Ş; T , w), this can be written in the loss-minimisation form used earlier as 

╬Şi ÔćÉ ╬Şi Ôłĺ ╬▓ Ôłç╬Şi LT ,wi (¤Ç╬Şi ). (38) 

Proof. See Appendix B-D. This suggests that specialisation across preferences can reduce cross-preference gradient cancellation and, together with preference diversity, encourage the discovery of com-plementary nondominated solutions that expand the PF set and increase hypervolume. Although both Meta-MORL and MERLION sample task variation during meta-training, the key distinction is that Meta-MORL aggregates all preference-conditioned gradients into a single shared meta-policy, whereas MERLION assigns each preference vector wi to its own meta-parameter ╬Şi. Hence, MERLION decentralises optimisation across preferences, which can mitigate cross-preference gradient interference even though each meta-policy still learns over a batch of tasks. 

C. Performance Measurements 

Let H = {v(n)}NH 

> n=1

ÔŐé RB denote the finite nondominated approximation set obtained on the target task, where each 

v(n) is an expected discounted vector return as in Eq. (12), 

B is the number of objectives, and all objectives are treated in maximisation form. Let xref Ôłł RB denote a fixed refer-ence point dominated by all attainable objective vectors. For distance-based evaluation, let Y = {y(m)}NY 

> m=1

ÔŐé RB denote the empirical reference PF, estimated by pooling all solutions across runs and extracting the nondominated subset. We assess each method using complementary indicators, as no single metric fully captures both convergence and diversity [50]ÔÇô[52]. 10 

a) Hypervolume.: Hypervolume measures the Lebesgue measure of the region dominated by H with respect to xref (see Eq. (8)). A larger hypervolume indicates a better approxima-tion in terms of both convergence and coverage [53], [54]. In this study, we use a standardised hypervolume with reference point xref = (0 , 0, 0) , which is valid since all objectives are normalised to [0 , 1] prior to evaluation, ensuring the reference point is dominated by all attainable objective vectors. 

b) Expected Utility Metric (EUM).: EUM evaluates pref-erence coverage under linear scalarisation: 

EUM( H) = EwÔł╝p(w)



max  

> vÔłłH

wÔŐĄv



, (39) where w Ôłł ÔłćBÔłĺ1 is a preference vector sampled from an evaluation distribution p(w) over the (B Ôłĺ 1) -simplex. Larger EUM indicates that the approximation set better supports a wide range of user preferences [55]. 

c) Sparsity.: Sparsity characterises the spacing between neighbouring solutions along each objective: 

S( H) = 1

NH Ôłĺ 1

> B

X

> b=1
> NHÔłĺ1

X

> i=1

 ╦ťvb, (i+1) Ôłĺ ╦ťvb, (i)

2 , (40) where ╦ťvb, (1) ÔëĄ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔëĄ ╦ťvb, (NH) are the objective-b values of the points in H after sorting in ascending order along objective b.Smaller sparsity indicates a denser approximation set, whereas excessively small values may also suggest concentration in a narrow region of the front [56]. 

d) Average Hausdorff Distance (AHD).: AHD measures the discrepancy between the approximation set H and the reference front Y:

Ôłćp(H, Y) = max 

(

1

NH

X

> vÔłłH

d(v, Y)p

!1/p 

,

´úź´úş 1

NY

X

> yÔłłY

d(y, H)p

´úÂ´úŞ

> 1/p

)

.

(41) where d(z, A) = min aÔłłA Ôłąz Ôłĺ aÔłą2 and we use p = 2.Lower AHD indicates a closer approximation to the reference front [57]. Here, Y is constructed by pooling all solutions from all methods and extracting the nondominated subset. V. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

This section evaluates the proposed algorithm against sev-eral benchmark methods on three SC problems varying in complexity [4] and various popular RL-based problems [9]. We conduct our experiments using Python 3.11.2 on Jupyter-Lab with 128 GB RAM and a 16-core CPU. The SC exper-iments are representative rather than exhaustive: the selected simple, moderate, and complex instances are non-trivial and capture increasing operational coupling, dimensionality, and constraint complexity. We train our main experiment on SC problems using three configurations that mimic the problems our industrial partner typically encounters in real life, as shown in Table I, using a customisable SC simulator [58]. TABLE I: SC environments used in our experiment, where complexity levels are defined by the sizes of the action and observation spaces and by the counts of nodes and edges.                 

> Complexities Action Observation Nodes Edges Simple 820 78Moderate 21 49 13 21 Complex 59 131 24 59

A. Algorithm Settings 

This section presents the experiment settings of our pro-posed algorithm along with its benchmark methods. Each instantiation runs across 10 seeds and obtains 10 PF approxi-mation sets. Further detailed parameters and hyperparameters used in these experiments are given in Appendix C. 

1) Meta-training settings: We implement MAML [5] with PPO [59] in Ray RLlib 2.3.1 [60], extending it to handle both Meta-MORL and MERLION. For Meta-MORL, meta-training runs for 10 6 environment steps on randomly generated SC tasks. We use four inner steps for simple tasks and eight for moderate or complex ones, trading off rapid adaptation against task-specific learning. A meta-environment wrapper supports dynamic task sampling to better mirror realistic task variation. MERLION uses a comparable total step budget to Meta-MORL, distributed across the P subproblems rather than mul-tiplied by P . Preference weights w are drawn uniformly from the 3D simplex via Dirichlet (1 , 1, 1) , and linear scalarisation is adopted for its simplicity and smooth optimisation landscape when training many subproblems in high-dimensional combi-natorial domains. Training stability is enhanced through PPO clipping, KullbackÔÇôLeibler regularisation, and generalised ad-vantage estimation. Although maintaining P meta-policies increases meta-training cost, the subproblems are independent and can in principle be trained in parallel. Moreover, this is a one-time offline investment: at deployment, MERLION requires only 5,000ÔÇô25,000 fine-tuning steps per subproblem (Ôł╝3.3% of conventional training), amortising the upfront over-head across repeated deployments on new SC configurations. 

2) Fine-tuning settings: Fine-tuning uses the Messiah SC simulator [4] for 5,000, 15,000, and 25,000 steps on simple, moderate, and complex tasks, respectively, which is substan-tially fewer than training-from-scratch RL baselines (typically 

Ôł╝500,000 steps in our SC setup). Similar fine-tuning steps are applied in the MERLION setup for each individual within the population. The number of shots matches meta-training. The observation and action spaces are normalised. We fine-tune using PPO and apply non-dominated sorting [58]. To reduce variance, we employ generalised advantage estimation with advantage normalisation and adopt a standard multilayer perceptron policy. We set local perturbation sizes M = [5 , 2, 2] 

for simple, moderate, and complex problems and a fixed perturbation strength ╬┤pert = 0 .05 across all settings. 

3) MORL-based method settings: We adopt MORL/D [61] as the representative conventional MORL approach because its underlying mechanism closely matches that of our proposed method, namely a population-based framework with problem decomposition. The MORL/D implementation is equipped with a reward normalisation wrapper so that all components 11 

of the reward vector lie on a comparable scale. It is trained under the scalarised expected returns objective [46], where expected values are first estimated from multiple runs and sub-sequently used to compute the utility. In this study, MORL/D is instantiated with a multi-policy soft actorÔÇôcritic [62], which proceeds in two phases: it first employs MORL/D to learn a collection of policies and then applies an evolutionary strategy to further explore the solution space using these previously learned policies as a starting point. 

4) Population-based metaheuristic method settings: Com-paring RL with optimisation-based methods requires careful consideration because RL learns policies through sequen-tial environment interactions, whereas population-based meta-heuristics search directly in the decision space by improving a set of candidate solutions. Nevertheless, this comparison is useful for positioning RL methods against established multi-objective SC optimisation approaches. We use the NSGA-II implementation in Pymoo [63], and MOEA/D and MOPSO from Pygmo [64]. Parameter settings are selected to promote convergence and diversity within our computational budget. For NSGA-II, mutation and crossover distribution indices control the explorationÔÇôexploitation trade-off, with smaller values encouraging broader search and larger values favouring local refinement [8]. MOEA/D guides the search through scalarised subproblems, whereas MOPSO up-dates particles using individual and global best positions. Empirical trials showed that population sizes greater than 300 repeatedly caused system-level memory failures. We therefore set the population size to 300 for all population-based metaheuristics, which is the largest feasible value under our computational constraints. 

5) Standard MORL benchmarks: To extend MERLION performance outside of SC (see Section V-D), we adopt several additional traditional RL methods as baselines. To ensure a fair and rigorous comparison of sample efficiency, we carefully control the environmental interaction budgets across all algorithms. The conventional MORL baselines were trained from scratch for a total of 3 ├Ś 10 6 timesteps per environment to allow sufficient convergence. In contrast, the meta-learning approaches (Meta-MORL and the proposed MERLION) un-dergo a meta-training phase consisting of 3 ├Ś 10 6 cumula-tive timesteps distributed across the diverse task distribution. However, during the crucial adaptation phase on unseen tar-get environments, both Meta-MORL and MERLION were restricted to a fine-tuning budget of only 100 , 000 timesteps per scalarisation weight. This experimental design explicitly highlights the core advantage of our approach: amortising the high 3 ├Ś 10 6 computational cost during offline meta-training, thereby enabling rapid, sample-efficient policy adaptation (re-quiring only Ôł╝ 3.3% of the conventional training budget) when deployed in new scenarios. 

B. Experiment Results 

In this section, we compare MERLION against several baseline algorithms, including Meta-MORL [42], which ex-tends MAML-style [5] Meta-RL via a scalarisation approach; MORL/D [61], which exemplifies MORL methods based on decomposition; and NSGA-II [8], a widely used evolutionary algorithm for combinatorial optimisation [19]. For additional comparison, we also include MOEA/D [7] and MOPSO [22] in our experiments. We assess significance using a non-parametric pipeline: the KruskalÔÇôWallis test identifies overall differences, followed by DunnÔÇÖs test with Bonferroni correction for pairwise com-parisons against MERLION. This controls the family-wise error rate more conservatively than uncorrected tests. In all result tables, markers denote a significant difference from MERLION ( p < 0.05 ). 

1) Convergence analysis: Figure 3 illustrates the hyper-volume achieved by MERLION and the baseline algorithms over the course of fine-tuning. For simple and moderate SC settings, our method attains the largest hypervolume within 5,000 and 15,000 fine-tuning steps, respectively, whereas MORL/D requires 500,000 steps to reach its performance. Furthermore, for the complex SC case with 25,000 steps, the hypervolume obtained by our approach remains on par with MORL/D, with no substantial difference. Across all levels of problem complexity, our algorithm consistently outperforms Meta-MORL and the metaheuristic approaches in terms of hypervolume (see Table II). 

2) Overall performance: Table II summarises the overall performance across the three SC complexities. MERLION achieves the best hypervolume in the simple and moderate SC cases, while being competitive against MORL/D in complex SC, and the best AHD in all cases. This indicates that MER-LION generally provides strong PF approximation quality, balancing dominated objective-space coverage with closeness to the estimated reference PF. The difference between hyper-volume and AHD also explains why some methods obtain relatively high hypervolume but poor AHD such as shown in MORL/D. Hypervolume rewards the volume dominated by the obtained solutions with respect to a reference point, so a method can score highly if it finds a few extreme or widely spread solutions that dominate a large region. In contrast, AHD measures the distance between the obtained approximation set and the estimated reference PF, so it penalises solutions that are far from the true trade-off surface even when their dominated volume is large. Sparsity further characterises the distribution of solutions. MERLION produces relatively less concentrated fronts in the simple and moderate complex cases, while in the complex case, its sparsity becomes comparable to that of other methods, reflecting the increased difficulty of maintaining a broad spread under tighter operational constraints. EUM is reported only for preference-conditioned meta-learning methods. MERLION achieves the best EUM in simple SC, but Meta-MORL is higher in moderate and complex SC, suggesting that MER-LION prioritises PF approximation quality and diversity rather than explicitly optimising uniform preference coverage. For MOPSO, constraint violations occur across all SC set-tings, but their effect differs by complexity. In the simple and moderate cases, MOPSO can still identify feasible candidates, whereas in the complex case, no feasible solutions are found, leading to zero hypervolume and indicating that the swarm search fails to locate operationally valid solutions under tightly 12      

> (a) Simple SC (b) Moderate SC (c) Complex SC

Fig. 3: Hypervolume convergence plots across SC environments. Our proposed algorithm consistently shows higher hypervolume than Meta-MORL and NSGA-II at convergence in all problem complexities, while showing higher hypervolume than MORL/D in simple and moderate SC. TABLE II: Hypervolume (Hv), sparsity (Spar), Expected Utility Metric (EUM), and AHD summary across problem complexities. MERLION consistently presents the best AHD values in all complexities, and the best hypervolume in simple and moderate SC.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

> Problem Algorithm Hv Mean ÔćĹHv Std Spar Mean ÔëłSpar Std EUM Mean ÔćĹEUM Std AHD Mean ÔćôAHD Std
> Simple MOEA/D 0.2740 Ôľ▓0.0115 0.0008 Ôľ▓0.0000 --0.4673 Ôľ╝0.0174 MOPSO *0.2071 Ôľ▓0.0228 0.0000 Ôľ▓0.0000 --0.4501 Ôľ╝0.0190 NSGA-II 0.2682 Ôľ▓0.0376 0.0022 ÔŚŽ0.0010 --0.5976 Ôľ╝0.0145 MORL/D 0.4126 ÔŚŽ0.0185 0.0245 ÔŚŽ0.0142 --0.5813 Ôľ╝0.0177 Meta-MORL 0.4333 ÔŚŽ0.0170 0.0056 ÔŚŽ0.0011 0.7075 Ôľ▓0.0070 0.2237 ÔŚŽ0.0418 MERLION ( ours )0.5356 0.0179 0.0607 0.0504 0.7229 0.0808 0.1008 0.0043 Moderate MOEA/D 0.3046 Ôľ▓0.0172 0.0012 Ôľ▓0.0000 --0.3648 Ôľ╝0.0209 MOPSO *0.0592 Ôľ▓0.0067 0.0000 Ôľ▓0.0000 --0.7033 Ôľ╝0.0172 NSGA-II 0.2115 Ôľ▓0.0374 0.0000 Ôľ▓0.0000 --0.6500 Ôľ╝0.0372 MORL/D 0.6849 ÔŚŽ0.0193 0.0082 ÔŚŽ0.0047 --0.8527 Ôľ╝0.0157 Meta-MORL 0.6737 ÔŚŽ0.0190 0.0015 Ôľ▓0.0006 0.8308 Ôľ╝0.0073 0.3092 ÔŚŽ0.0378 MERLION ( ours )0.7402 0.0353 0.0178 0.0075 0.7778 0.0309 0.0779 0.0115 Complex MOEA/D 0.0516 Ôľ▓0.0202 0.0025 ÔŚŽ0.0004 --0.7243 Ôľ╝0.0250 MOPSO *0.0000 Ôľ▓0.0000 0.0000 Ôľ▓0.0000 --0.7991 Ôľ╝0.0192 NSGA-II 0.0384 Ôľ▓0.0096 0.0000 Ôľ▓0.0000 --0.4623 ÔŚŽ0.0147 MORL/D 0.3619 ÔŚŽ0.0274 0.0322 ÔŚŽ0.0121 --0.5879 Ôľ╝0.0614 Meta-MORL 0.2658 ÔŚŽ0.0099 0.0022 ÔŚŽ0.0006 0.6127 Ôľ╝0.0030 0.2894 ÔŚŽ0.0541 MERLION ( ours )0.3513 0.0334 0.0100 0.0065 0.6091 0.0552 0.1779 0.0061
> Note: ÔćĹand Ôćôindicate metrics to be maximised or minimised, respectively. For sparsity ( Ôëł), balanced values are preferred; too high implies poor coverage, while too low indicates excessive concentration of solutions. Ôľ▓,Ôľ╝, or ÔŚŽsignifies that ours is significantly higher, significantly lower ( p < 0.05 ), or not significantly different from the appointed value, respectively.
> *Constraint violations occur in all MOPSO runs, but only the complex case results in zero feasible solutions.

coupled SC constraints. 

3) PF approximation: We compare the solution sets of the PF approximations produced by representative algorithms using the run that achieves the highest hypervolume. Figure 4 illustrates the solution spread obtained by each algorithm, consistent with Table II, where our proposed algorithm shows the highest hypervolume in simple and moderate complex SC settings, indicating more diverse and closer-to-optimal solu-tions. Moreover, the AHD values of our proposed algorithm consistently show the least, indicating that the resulting PF approximation sets are the closest to the true PF values. We highlight that the PF approximation set produced by MERLION exhibits diversity comparable to that of MORL/D, a traditional MORL method, while requiring substantially fewer time steps (5,000ÔÇô25,000 for MERLION versus 500,000 for MORL/D). Furthermore, the integration of evolutionary mechanisms is proven to be effective in significantly spreading out solution sets. This is signified when comparing the sets with Meta-MORL, which uses similar fine-tuning time steps. Meanwhile, the traditional evolutionary method alone (i.e., 13      

> (a) Simple SC (b) Moderate SC (c) Complex SC

Fig. 4: PF plots for the SC problems. Overall, the solution set generated by our proposed algorithm exhibits the highest diversity in simple and moderate SC instances,while comparable with MORL/D in complex SC. TABLE III: Hypervolume (Hv), sparsity (Spar), Expected Utility Metric (EUM) across parameters. Defaut setting follows simple SC configuration, i.e., P =10, ╬Ěcross = 0 .6, M =4, except for time steps.                                                                                                                         

> Parameters Settings Hv Mean ÔćĹHv Std Spar Mean ÔëłSpar Std EUM Mean ÔćĹEUM Std AHD mean ÔćôAHD Std All default 0.5356 0.0179 0.0607 0.0504 0.7229 0.0808 0.1008 0.0043
> P50.5166 ÔŚŽ0.0225 0.0810 ÔŚŽ0.0880 0.6528 ÔŚŽ0.0460 0.0972 ÔŚŽ0.0284 15 0.5446 ÔŚŽ0.0155 0.0484 ÔŚŽ0.0454 0.6470 ÔŚŽ0.2518 0.0789 Ôľ▓0.0082
> ╬Ěcross 0.3 0.5290 ÔŚŽ0.0156 0.0459 ÔŚŽ0.0648 0.7445 ÔŚŽ0.0982 0.0937 ÔŚŽ0.0284 0.9 0.5426 ÔŚŽ0.0146 0.0256 ÔŚŽ0.0272 0.8348 ÔŚŽ0.0827 0.0911 ÔŚŽ0.0119
> M00.4625 ÔŚŽ0.0122 0.0543 ÔŚŽ0.0547 0.7164 ÔŚŽ0.0801 0.1238 ÔŚŽ0.0189 20.5221 ÔŚŽ0.0211 0.0756 ÔŚŽ0.0635 0.7172 ÔŚŽ0.0852 0.0981 ÔŚŽ0.0104 Time steps *20,000 0.2907 Ôľ▓0.0334 0.0112 ÔŚŽ0.0102 0.6096 ÔŚŽ0.1722 0.2144 ÔŚŽ0.0109
> 25,000 0.3513 0.0101 0.0101 0.0066 0.6091 0.0552 0.1779 0.0061
> Note: Symbols follow Table II.
> *Time-step ablation is evaluated using the complex SC setup with 25,000 being the default time steps.

represented by NSGA-II) is rather ineffective in exploring the objective space, especially when the solution dimension grows significantly, as in complex SC. Our experiment signifies that the evolutionary mechanism applied in the population of meta-policies can address the typical problem arising from few-shot and limited fine-tuning time steps when applying meta-learning-based methods, while still benefiting from amortised meta-training cost since we do not need to repeat meta-training for new, unseen tasks. Instead, we only require fine-tuning for a substantially smaller number of time steps than traditional methods. Meta-MORL and metaheuristic methods generally yield more clustered solutions in higher-dimensional search spaces, largely due to insufficient learning when trading off explo-ration and exploitation. In MERLION, this issue can be alleviated by increasing the population size of meta-policies and/or extending the fine-tuning horizon, at the expense of additional computational resources. 

4) Operational analysis: We examine representative solu-tions with the most balanced final weights across multiple runs for each SC setting. As problem complexity increases, the learned policies shift from more reactive production and inven-tory dynamics toward steadier production and more concen-trated stockholding at selected facilities. Demand loss remains broadly controlled, but becomes less uniformly distributed in the more complex settings. More details and operational plots are provided in the Appendix G. 

C. Ablation Study 

We run an ablation study on the simple SC benchmark to assess MERLIONÔÇÖs sensitivity to three hyperparameters: population size P , crossover probability ╬Ěcross , and local per-turbation size M (defaults: P =10 , ╬Ěcross =0 .6, M =4 ). Table III summarises the resulting changes in optimality and diversity. Varying P has the clearest effect. A smaller population (P =5 ) lowers hypervolume and EUM, and yields a sparser approximation set, indicating weaker coverage. Increasing to 

P =15 gives the strongest PF approximation, with the highest hypervolume, much lower AHD (closer to the true PF), and denser solutions (lower sparsity). However, EUM drops for both P =5 and P =15 relative to the default, implying that larger P favours broader PF coverage over maximising ex-pected utility under the sampled preferences. The only clearly 14 

TABLE IV: Normalised Hypervolume (HV) and Sparsity (Spar) of Merlion vs Traditional and Meta RL                                                                                                                                           

> Algorithm mo-halfcheetah-v4 deep-sea-treasure-v0 resource-gathering-v0 mo-hopper-v4 mo-reacher-v4 Average Rank HV Spar HV Spar HV Spar HV Spar HV Spar HV PCN 0.0185 Ôľ▓0.0000 Ôľ▓----0.0024 Ôľ▓0.0020 Ôľ▓0.0244 Ôľ▓0.0168 Ôľ▓0.0151 7CAPQL 0.1981 ÔŚŽ0.0001 Ôľ▓----0.0069 Ôľ▓0.0003 Ôľ▓0.0004 -0.1025 5PGMORL 0.0375 Ôľ▓0.0002 Ôľ▓----0.0058 Ôľ▓0.0037 Ôľ▓--0.0217 6MPMOQL --0.4507 ÔŚŽ0.0702 ÔŚŽ0.1421 Ôľ▓0.3272 ÔŚŽ----0.2964 3MORL/D 0.2240 ÔŚŽ0.0004 ÔŚŽ0.3033 Ôľ▓0.0086 ÔŚŽ0.0984 Ôľ▓0.0233 Ôľ▓0.0138 ÔŚŽ0.0010 Ôľ▓0.0685 ÔŚŽ0.0391 Ôľ▓0.1416 4Meta-MORL
> 0.7432 ÔŚŽ0.0201 ÔŚŽ0.2900 Ôľ▓0.0000 Ôľ▓0.4000 Ôľ▓0.3275 Ôľ▓0.0520 ÔŚŽ0.0073 ÔŚŽ0.1513 ÔŚŽ0.1883 ÔŚŽ0.3273 2
> MERLION (ours)
> 0.4181 0.0405 0.5416 0.0185 1.0000 0.0000 0.5888 0.1158 0.1295 0.1713 0.5356 1
> Note: Symbols follow Table II.

significant change across settings is the AHD reduction at 

P =15 .Varying ╬Ěcross shows consistent but modest effects. Higher crossover probability generally increases EUM, slightly im-proves hypervolume and AHD, and yields denser solution sets, reflecting more effective recombination of behavioural traits across meta-policies. Lower ╬Ěcross produces weaker gains, with slightly reduced hypervolume and higher AHD. Local perturbations are crucial for exploration. Disabling them ( M =0 ) yields the lowest hypervolume and worst AHD, indicating premature convergence and poor Pareto coverage. A moderate rate (M =2 ) partly restores performance and produces a sparser set than M =0 , but still underperforms the default, suggesting stronger perturbations better preserve diversity. Except for the significant AHD gain at P =15 , most configuration differences are small (often within one standard deviation and not significant), showing MERLION is fairly robust to these hyperparameters on the simple SC benchmark. Moreover, we investigate how adding more time steps during fine-tuning affects performance when using complex SC. The results show that including an additional 5,000 time steps can increase the hypervolume by up to approximately 20%, while having little impact on the other metrics. 

D. Cross-Domain Experiments 

Table IV summarises MERLIONÔÇÖs performance beyond the supply-chain domain. Across the toy MORL benchmarks, MERLION achieves the highest average normalised hyper-volume and the best overall rank, with statistically significant gains on deep-sea-treasure-v0, resource-gathering-v0, and mo-hopper-v4. Although Meta-MORL attains the highest mean hypervolume on mo-halfcheetah-v4, the difference is not sig-nificant due to its higher variance, and the two meta-learning methods are also statistically comparable on mo-reacher-v4. In terms of sparsity, MERLION generally maintains a moder-ate and well-dispersed approximation set, suggesting that its strong hypervolume does not arise from collapsing solutions into a narrow region of the PF. Overall, these results suggest that the benefits of MERLIONÔÇÖs are not limited to SC and can extend to a wider range of MORL domains. VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 

MERLION is a population-based Meta-MORL framework that combines gradient-based meta-learning with evolutionary search in the scalarisation weight space. Across SC problems of varying complexity, it consistently achieves the lowest AHD and the highest hypervolume in Simple and Moderate SC. In Complex SC, MERLION remains competitive with MORL/D under a 25 ├Ś smaller fine-tuning budget, while still outperforming Meta-MORL under a comparable meta-learning adaptation budget. MERLION improves hypervolume by up to 32% over Meta-MORL, indicating that maintaining multiple meta-policies alleviates the limited exploration of few-shot adaptation from a single shared meta-policy. The PF approximations further show well-distributed solu-tion sets, particularly in Simple and Moderate SC, in line with the hypervolume and sparsity results. Overall, MERLION is comparable to MORL/D and outperforms Meta-MORL and metaheuristic baselines. Operational analysis showed more sta-ble manufacturing and inventory trajectories as SC complexity increased, although stockpiling became more concentrated at several facilities. Nevertheless, demand loss remains low across markets. MERLION also performed well on popular RL problems, attaining the highest average normalised hypervolume and the best overall ranking against Meta-MORL and several con-ventional MORL baselines, despite using substantially fewer adaptation timesteps. This highlights its ability to convert of-fline meta-training into rapid and sample-efficient adaptation. Future work includes improving coverage in more complex decision spaces, incorporating preference-aware evolutionary objectives to enhance EUM, and extending MERLION to larger and more realistic SC settings with richer operational constraints. REFERENCES [1] C. P. Jayarathna, D. Agdas, L. Dawes, and T. Yigitcanlar, ÔÇťMulti-Objective Optimization for Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics: A Review,ÔÇŁ Sustainability , vol. 13, no. 24, p. 13617, Dec. 2021. [2] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction ,1st ed. Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2015. [3] I. E. Shar, H. Wang, and C. Gupta, ÔÇťMulti-Objective Reinforcement Learning for Sustainable Supply Chain Optimization,ÔÇŁ in 2023 IEEE 19th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE) . Auckland, New Zealand: IEEE, Aug. 2023, pp. 1ÔÇô7. [4] R. Rachman, J. Tingey, R. Allmendinger, P. Shukla, and W. Pan, ÔÇťReinforcement learning for multi-objective multi-echelon supply chain optimisation,ÔÇŁ European Journal of Operational Research , p. S0377221726001177, Feb. 2026. [5] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, ÔÇťModel-Agnostic Meta-Learning for Fast Adaptation of Deep Networks,ÔÇŁ 2017. 15 

[6] R. Rachman, J. Tingey, R. Allmendinger, W. Pan, P. Shukla, and B. I. Nasution, ÔÇťMIRACL: A Diverse Meta-Reinforcement Learning for Multi-Objective Multi-Echelon Combinatorial Supply Chain Optimisa-tion,ÔÇŁ 2026. [7] Q. Zhang and H. Li, ÔÇťMOEA/D: A Multiobjective Evolutionary Algo-rithm Based on Decomposition,ÔÇŁ IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 712ÔÇô731, Dec. 2007. [8] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, ÔÇťA fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,ÔÇŁ IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182ÔÇô197, Apr. 2002. [9] F. Felten, L. N. Alegre, A. Now┬┤ e, A. L. C. Bazzan, E. G. Talbi, G. Danoy, and B. C. da Silva, ÔÇťA toolkit for reliable benchmarking and research in multi-objective reinforcement learning,ÔÇŁ in Proceedings of the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) ,2023. [10] T. G. Smolinski, ÔÇťMulti-objective Evolutionary Algorithms,ÔÇŁ in Ency-clopedia of Computational Neuroscience , D. Jaeger and R. Jung, Eds. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2014, pp. 1ÔÇô4. [11] K. Deb, Multi-Objective Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorithms ,1st ed., ser. Wiley-Interscience Series in Systems and Optimization. Chichester ; New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001. [12] S. Faramarzi-Oghani, P. Dolati Neghabadi, E.-G. Talbi, and R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, ÔÇťMeta-heuristics for sustainable supply chain management: A review,ÔÇŁ International Journal of Production Research , vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1979ÔÇô2009, Mar. 2023. [13] P. K. Detwal, R. Agrawal, A. Samadhiya, and A. Kumar, ÔÇťMetaheuristics in circular supply chain intelligent systems: A review of applications journey and forging a path to the future,ÔÇŁ Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , vol. 126, p. 107102, 2023. [14] C. M. Fonseca, P. J. Fleming et al. , ÔÇťGenetic algorithms for multiob-jective optimization: Formulationdiscussion and generalization.ÔÇŁ in Icga ,vol. 93. Citeseer, 1993, pp. 416ÔÇô423. [15] M. De, B. Das, and M. Maiti, ÔÇťGreen logistics under imperfect pro-duction system: A Rough age based Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm approach,ÔÇŁ Computers & Industrial Engineering , vol. 119, pp. 100ÔÇô113, May 2018. [16] W.-C. Yeh and M.-C. Chuang, ÔÇťUsing multi-objective genetic algorithm for partner selection in green supply chain problems,ÔÇŁ Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 4244ÔÇô4253, Apr. 2011. [17] R. Ehtesham Rasi and M. Sohanian, ÔÇťA multi-objective optimization model for sustainable supply chain network with using genetic algo-rithm,ÔÇŁ Journal of Modelling in Management , vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 714ÔÇô 727, 2021. [18] M. Kadzi┬┤ nski, T. Tervonen, M. K. Tomczyk, and R. Dekker, ÔÇťEvaluation of multi-objective optimization approaches for solving green supply chain design problems,ÔÇŁ Omega , vol. 68, pp. 168ÔÇô184, Apr. 2017. [19] Y. Wang, Q. Shi, Q. Hu, Z. You, Y. Bai, and C. Guo, ÔÇťAn efficiency sorting multi-objective optimization framework for sustainable supply network optimization and decision making,ÔÇŁ Journal of Cleaner Pro-duction , vol. 272, p. 122842, Nov. 2020. [20] E. Zitzler, M. Laumanns, and L. Thiele, ÔÇťSPEA2: Improving the strength pareto evolutionary algorithm,ÔÇŁ ETH Zurich, Tech. Rep., May 2001. [21] A. Azadeh, F. Shafiee, R. Yazdanparast, J. Heydari, and A. M. Fathabad, ÔÇťEvolutionary multi-objective optimization of environmental indicators of integrated crude oil supply chain under uncertainty,ÔÇŁ Journal of Cleaner Production , vol. 152, pp. 295ÔÇô311, May 2017. [22] C. Coello, G. Pulido, and M. Lechuga, ÔÇťHandling multiple objectives with particle swarm optimization,ÔÇŁ IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 256ÔÇô279, Jun. 2004. [23] A. Jahed, S. M. Hadji Molana, and R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, ÔÇťA sus-tainable vaccine supply-production-distribution network with heterolo-gous and homologous vaccination strategies: Bi-objective optimization,ÔÇŁ 

Socio-Economic Planning Sciences , vol. 98, p. 102113, Apr. 2025. [24] S. Mirjalili, S. Saremi, S. M. Mirjalili, and L. d. S. Coelho, ÔÇťMulti-objective grey wolf optimizer: A novel algorithm for multi-criterion optimization,ÔÇŁ Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 47, pp. 106ÔÇô119, 2016. [25] A. Ala, A. Goli, S. Mirjalili, and V. Simic, ÔÇťA fuzzy multi-objective optimization model for sustainable healthcare supply chain network design,ÔÇŁ Applied Soft Computing , vol. 150, p. 111012, 2024. [26] K. Deb and H. Jain, ÔÇťAn evolutionary many-objective optimization algorithm using reference-point-based nondominated sorting approach, part I: Solving problems with box constraints,ÔÇŁ IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 577ÔÇô601, 2014. [27] G. Wang, ÔÇťGreen supply chain management and coordinated optimiza-tion by an improved sparrow search algorithm,ÔÇŁ Scientific Reports ,vol. 15, no. 1, p. 36730, Oct. 2025. [28] T. Halder and B. K. Debnath, ÔÇťMulti-objective closed-loop supply chain inventory model with learning and forgetting under carbon emission policies using NSGA-II, MOPSO, and TOPSIS,ÔÇŁ Applied Soft Comput-ing , vol. 180, p. 113291, 2025. [29] Y. Lin, F. Lin, G. Cai, H. Chen, L. Zou, Y. Liu, and P. Wu, ÔÇťEvolutionary Reinforcement Learning: A Systematic Review and Future Directions,ÔÇŁ 

Mathematics , vol. 13, no. 5, p. 833, Mar. 2025. [30] J. Shianifar, M. Schukat, and K. Mason, ÔÇťMO-CoERL: Multi-objective cooperative evolutionary deep reinforcement learning,ÔÇŁ Information Sci-ences , vol. 748, p. 123517, 2026. [31] P. Yang, L. Zhang, H. Liu, and G. Li, ÔÇťReducing idleness in financial cloud services via multi-objective evolutionary reinforcement learning based load balancer,ÔÇŁ Science China Information Sciences , vol. 67, no. 2, p. 120102, Feb. 2024. [32] X. Yu, Z. Hu, W. Luo, and Y. Xue, ÔÇťReinforcement learning-based multi-objective differential evolution algorithm for feature selection,ÔÇŁ 

Information Sciences , vol. 661, p. 120185, Mar. 2024. [33] R. Shen, Y. Zheng, J. Hao, Z. Meng, Y. Chen, C. Fan, and Y. Liu, ÔÇťGenerating behavior-diverse game ais with evolutionary multi-objective deep reinforcement learning.ÔÇŁ in IJCAI , 2020, pp. 3371ÔÇô3377. [34] E. Marchesini, D. Corsi, and A. Farinelli, ÔÇťExploring Safer Behaviors for Deep Reinforcement Learning,ÔÇŁ Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 7701ÔÇô7709, Jun. 2022. [35] Y. Qiu, N. Kotecha, and A. Del Rio Chanona, ÔÇťLeveraging reinforcement learning and evolutionary strategies for dynamic multi objective decision making in supply chain management,ÔÇŁ IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 58, no. 14, pp. 598ÔÇô603, 2024. [36] P. Garcia and O. Pierrard, ÔÇťModeling the Evolution of Carbon Intensity: Linking the Solow Model to the Transport Equation,ÔÇŁ Environmental and Resource Economics , vol. 88, no. 12, pp. 3473ÔÇô3511, Dec. 2025. [37] J. Schmidthuber, ÔÇťEvolutionary principles in self-referential learning,ÔÇŁ Ph.D. dissertation, 1987. [38] S. Thrun and L. Pratt, ÔÇťLearning to Learn: Introduction and Overview,ÔÇŁ in Learning to Learn , S. Thrun and L. Pratt, Eds. Boston, MA: Springer US, 1998, pp. 3ÔÇô17. [39] H. Altae-Tran, B. Ramsundar, A. S. Pappu, and V. Pande, ÔÇťLow data drug discovery with one-shot learning,ÔÇŁ ACS central science , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 283ÔÇô293, 2017. [40] A. Ignatov, R. Timofte, A. Kulik, S. Yang, K. Wang, F. Baum, M. Wu, L. Xu, and L. Van Gool, ÔÇťAI Benchmark: All About Deep Learning on Smartphones in 2019,ÔÇŁ 2019. [41] Y. Duan, J. Schulman, X. Chen, P. L. Bartlett, I. Sutskever, and P. Abbeel, ÔÇťRL$╦ć2$: Fast Reinforcement Learning via Slow Reinforce-ment Learning,ÔÇŁ 2016. [42] X. Chen, A. Ghadirzadeh, M. Bjorkman, and P. Jensfelt, ÔÇťMeta-Learning for Multi-objective Reinforcement Learning,ÔÇŁ in 2019 IEEE/RSJ Inter-national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . Macau, China: IEEE, Nov. 2019, pp. 977ÔÇô983. [43] F.-Y. Liu and C. Qian, ÔÇťPrediction Guided Meta-Learning for Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning,ÔÇŁ in 2021 IEEE Congress on Evolu-tionary Computation (CEC) . Krak┬┤ ow, Poland: IEEE, Jun. 2021, pp. 2171ÔÇô2178. [44] J. Lu, P. Mannion, and K. Mason, ÔÇťA Meta-Learning Approach for Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning in Sustainable Home Environ-ments,ÔÇŁ 2024. [45] A. A. Al-Habob, H. Tabassum, and O. Waqar, ÔÇťNon-orthogonal age-optimal information dissemination in vehicular networks: A meta multi-objective reinforcement learning approach,ÔÇŁ IEEE Transactions on Mo-bile Computing , vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 9789ÔÇô9803, 2024. [46] C. F. Hayes, R. R╦ś adulescu, E. Bargiacchi, J. K┬Ę allstr┬Ę om, M. Macfarlane, M. Reymond, T. Verstraeten, L. M. Zintgraf, R. Dazeley, F. Heintz, E. Howley, A. A. Irissappane, P. Mannion, A. Now┬┤ e, G. Ramos, M. Restelli, P. Vamplew, and D. M. Roijers, ÔÇťA practical guide to multi-objective reinforcement learning and planning,ÔÇŁ Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , vol. 36, no. 1, p. 26, Apr. 2022. [47] T. Hanne and M. J. Moghaddam, ÔÇťA review of the evolution of multi-objective evolutionary algorithms,ÔÇŁ Computers, Materials and Continua ,vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 4203ÔÇô4236, 2025. [48] T. Ulrich and L. Thiele, ÔÇťBounding the Effectiveness of Hypervolume-Based ( ╬╝ + ╬╗)-Archiving Algorithms,ÔÇŁ in Learning and Intelligent Optimization , Y. Hamadi and M. Schoenauer, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, vol. 7219, pp. 235ÔÇô249. [49] A. P. Guerreiro, C. M. Fonseca, and L. Paquete, ÔÇťThe Hypervolume Indicator: Computational Problems and Algorithms,ÔÇŁ ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1ÔÇô42, Jul. 2022. [50] J. Knowles, Local-Search and Hybrid Evolutionary Algorithms for Pareto Optimization . University of Reading, 2002. 16 

[51] E. Zitzler, L. Thiele, M. Laumanns, C. Fonseca, and V. Da Fonseca, ÔÇťPerformance assessment of multiobjective optimizers: An analysis and review,ÔÇŁ IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 117ÔÇô132, Apr. 2003. [52] J. Branke, Multiobjective Optimization: Interactive and Evolutionary Approaches , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2008, no. 5252. [53] E. Zitzler and L. Thiele, ÔÇťMultiobjective optimization using evolutionary algorithms ÔÇö A comparative case study,ÔÇŁ in Parallel Problem Solving from Nature ÔÇö PPSN V , G. Goos, J. Hartmanis, J. Van Leeuwen, A. E. Eiben, T. B┬Ę ack, M. Schoenauer, and H.-P. Schwefel, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998, vol. 1498, pp. 292ÔÇô301. [54] S. ┬»Obayashi, Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization: 4th Interna-tional Conference, EMO 2007, Matsushima, Japan, March 5-8, 2007 Proceedings , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin New York: Springer, 2007, no. 4403. [55] L. M. Zintgraf, T. V. Kanters, D. M. Roijers, F. A. Oliehoek, and P. Beau, ÔÇťQuality Assessment of MORL Algorithms: A Utility-Based Approach,ÔÇŁ in Proceedings of the 24th Annual Machine Learning Conference of Belgium and the Netherlands , 2015. [56] J. Xu, Y. Tian, P. Ma, D. Rus, S. Sueda, and W. Matusik, ÔÇťPrediction-guided multi-objective reinforcement learning for continuous robot con-trol,ÔÇŁ in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, H. D. III and A. Singh, Eds., vol. 119. PMLR, Jul. 2020, pp. 10 607ÔÇô10 616. [57] O. Schutze, X. Esquivel, A. Lara, and C. A. C. Coello, ÔÇťUsing the Averaged Hausdorff Distance as a Performance Measure in Evolution-ary Multiobjective Optimization,ÔÇŁ IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 504ÔÇô522, Aug. 2012. [58] R. Rachman, J. Tingey, R. Allmendinger, P. Shukla, and W. Pan, ÔÇťMulti-objective Sequential Decision Making for Holistic Supply Chain Optimization,ÔÇŁ in Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization , H. Singh, T. Ray, J. Knowles, X. Li, J. Branke, B. Wang, and A. Oyama, Eds. Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore, 2025, vol. 15512, pp. 259ÔÇô274. [59] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, ÔÇťProximal Policy Optimization Algorithms,ÔÇŁ 2017. [60] E. Liang, R. Liaw, P. Moritz, R. Nishihara, R. Fox, K. Goldberg, J. E. Gonzalez, M. I. Jordan, and I. Stoica, ÔÇťRLlib: Abstractions for Distributed Reinforcement Learning,ÔÇŁ 2017. [61] F. Felten, E.-G. Talbi, and G. Danoy, ÔÇťMulti-Objective Reinforcement Learning Based on Decomposition: A Taxonomy and Framework,ÔÇŁ 2023. [62] D. Chen, Y. Wang, and W. Gao, ÔÇťCombining a gradient-based method and an evolution strategy for multi-objective reinforcement learning,ÔÇŁ 

Applied Intelligence , vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 3301ÔÇô3317, Oct. 2020. [63] J. Blank and K. Deb, ÔÇťPymoo: Multi-Objective Optimization in Python,ÔÇŁ 

IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 89 497ÔÇô89 509, 2020. [64] F. Biscani and D. Izzo, ÔÇťA parallel global multiobjective framework for optimization: pagmo,ÔÇŁ Journal of Open Source Software , vol. 5, no. 53, p. 2338, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.02338 17 

APPENDIX APROBLEM DEFINITION : MOMDP-B ASED FORMULATION 

Table V introduces the specific notation employed in the SC modelling, whereas Table VI lists the nodes contained in each set as well as the sets that belong to each set family. TABLE V: Sets, parameters, and variables in the supply chain model. Nodes u, v, and w (u < v < w ) denote facilities, while t, ¤é, ¤ł, and ¤ä denote the time period, inventory, production, and transportation, respectively. 

Notations Definition Sets 

N s suppliers 

N m manufacturers 

N w¤ë mid-level warehouses that deliver to lower-level warehouses 

N d distribution centres that deliver to retailers *

N r retailers 

N z markets 

Family of sets 

N F rom origin nodes ( |N F rom | = n1)

N T o destination nodes ( |N T o | = n2)

N Inv inventory-holding non-production nodes ( |N Inv | = n3)

N Invf upstream inventory-shipping nodes ( |N Invf | = n4)

N Invt downstream inventory-receiving nodes ( |N Invt | = n5)

Parameters 

T Total period horizon 

Profit Total profit of all periods 

E Total emission of all periods 

F Total SL inequality measure of all periods 

SL y SL at node y of all periods 

Rev t Revenue at period tP C t Production cost at period tT C t Transport cost at period tIC t Inventory cost at period tL Transport lead time 

Itv Inventory unit at period t, node vc¤év Inventory cost per unit at node ve¤év Emission per unit resulted from inventory at node vc¤łv Manufacturing cost per unit at node ve¤łw Emission per unit resulted from the manufacturing process at node wc¤äuv Transport cost per unit per day from node u to ve¤äuv Emission per unit per day resulted from product transport from node u to v

Qtv The outstanding order at node vCE t The accumulated emission at period tAF t The average service level inequality in period tdtv Demand at period t, retailer vCap Transport capacity 

price v Product selling price at retailer v

M Very large number (big-M) 

Variables 

q¤ätuv Transport quantity at period t, from node u to vq¤łtw Manufacturing quantity at period t, at manufacturer w 

> *

Optional nodes in the SC. Mid-level warehouses, which may span multiple echelons, exist only if distribution centres (i.e., the lowest-level ware-houses) are present. Without warehouses, manufacturers act as distribution centres. 

TABLE VI: Sets and family of sets used in the formulation to distinguish between SC network problems. The following table lists the nodes covered in the sets and the sets covered in the family of sets in the three scenarios. Notation Simple SC Moderate SC Complex SC 

Sets 

N s 1 1, 2 1, 2, 3 

N m 2, 3 3, 4, 5 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 

N w1 NA 6, 7 9, 10, 11 

N d NA NA 12, 13, 14 

N r 4, 5 8, 9, 10 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 

N z 6, 7 11, 12, 13 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 

Family of sets 

N F rom N s, N m N s, N m, N w N s, N m, N w , N d

N T o N m, N r N m, N w , N r N m, N w , N dN r

N Inv N r N w , N r N w , N d, N r

N Invf N m N m, N w N m, N w , N d

N Invt N r , N z N w , N r , N z N w , N d, N r , N z

For the completeness of this study, we restate the SC formu-lations that we adopt. Multi-echelon SC problems that involve several facilities and markets, along with non-stationary de-mand, are modelled using the MOMDP framework. 

A. State Transition Functions 

These expressions describe the evolution of the system from its state in period (t Ôłĺ 1) to its subsequent state in period 

t. The corresponding state transition relations are specified in Equations (42) through (46). In particular, Equation (42) imposes that the entire quantity of raw materials supplied is fully converted into finished products, as detailed below: 

q¤łtv = X 

> uÔłłNs

q¤ä 

> (tÔłĺL)uv

ÔłÇt, ÔłÇv Ôłł N m. (42) Equation (43) calculates the inventory levels considering the remainder of previous periods, additional goods (i.e., inflow), and goods shipped (i.e., outflow): 

Itv = I(tÔłĺ1) v + inflow tv Ôłĺ outflow tv ,

ÔłÇt, ÔłÇv Ôłł N Inv Ôł¬ N m

where inflow tv =

´ú▒´ú▓´ú│

q¤łtv if v Ôłł N m

P 

> uÔłłNInvf

q¤ä 

> (tÔłĺL)uv

if v Ôłł N Inv 

and outflow tv =

(P  

> wÔłłNInv
> 1

qvt w¤ä if v Ôłł N m

P 

> wÔłłNInvt
> {2,...,n 5}

q¤ätvw if v Ôłł N Inv .

(43) Equation (44) defines, for each node, the overall ordering quantity, represented as the aggregate of all incoming deliver-ies: 

Qtv = q¤ä 

> (tÔłĺL+1) uv

, . . . , q ¤ätuv , ÔłÇu Ôłł N F rom , ÔłÇv Ôłł N T o .

(44) Equation (45) specifies the computation of the daily cumula-tive emissions, given by: 

CE t = CE (tÔłĺ1) + Et. (45) Equation (46) computes the daily average SL inequality: 

AF t = (AF tÔłĺ1 ┬Ě (t Ôłĺ 1) + Ft)

t . (46) 18 

In our SC problem, we assume that state transitions are deterministic, meaning that no intrinsic randomness is involved (for instance, from lead time variability or defective product disposal), which would otherwise introduce uncertainty into the state transition, particularly in computing inventory for the next period. 

B. State Space (S) 

The system state captures how agents perceive the learned environment. Our SC modelÔÇÖs state variables include inventory levels for raw materials and finished products, outstanding orders across all routes within a given lead time, cumulative emissions, and the average service level inequality, subject to 

0 ÔëĄ I(tÔłĺ1) j . The state in period t is defined as follows: 

St = {I(tÔłĺ1) v , Q(tÔłĺ1)v, CE tÔłĺ1, AF tÔłĺ1, ÔłÇv Ôłł N T o }.

(47) 

C. Action Space (A) 

In our SC setting, the action encompasses the production quantities of all manufacturers as well as the shipment quan-tities across all routes. The actions in period t are defined as: 

At ={q¤ätuv , q ¤łtw , 0 ÔëĄ q¤ätuv ÔëĄ Cap, 0 ÔëĄ q¤łtw ,

ÔłÇu Ôłł N F rom , j Ôłł N T o , k Ôłł N m}. (48) 

D. Rewards (R) 

This problem incorporates three objectives: maximising profit, minimising GHG emissions, and minimising SL in-equality, which together form a three-dimensional reward vector. The MORL agents are designed to maximise the expected cumulative rewards. Since the second and third objectives should be penalised, they are assigned negative reward values. Accordingly, the reward vector is defined as 

Rt = {Prof t , ÔłĺEt , ÔłĺFt } ┬Ě ¤üt, where ¤ü denotes the penalty term that prevents the inventory level from dropping below zero, as specified in Equation (49): 

¤üt = X 

> vÔłłNT o

min( Itv , 0) ┬Ě M . (49) In RL, the reward values are derived from objective functions at each period as given in Equations (50), (51), and (52) below: 

Profit t = X 

> uÔłłNd

X 

> vÔłłNr

q¤ä 

> (tÔłĺL)uv

┬Ě price v

| {z }

> Revenue from delivered products

Ôłĺ X 

> wÔłłNm

q¤łtw ┬Ě c¤łw

v¤łw

!| {z }

> Manufacturing cost

Ôłĺ X 

> uÔłłNF rom

X 

> vÔłłNT o

q¤ätuv ┬Ě c¤äuv ┬Ě L

| {z }

> Transport cost over lead time

Ôłĺ X 

> vÔłłNT o

Itv ┬Ě c¤év

| {z }

> Inventory holding cost

(50) 

Et = X 

> vÔłłNT o

Itv ┬Ě e¤év

| {z }

> Inventory-related emissions

+ X 

> wÔłłNm

q¤łtw ┬Ě e¤łw

| {z }

> Manufacturing emissions

+ X 

> uÔłłNF rom

X 

> vÔłłNT o

q¤äuv ┬Ě e¤äuv ┬Ě L

| {z }

> Transport emissions over lead time

(51) 

Ft = 12

X 

> vÔłłNr

X  

> vÔÇ▓ÔłłNr
> vÔÇ▓╠Ş=v

|SL tv Ôłĺ SL tv ÔÇ▓ | ,

where: 

SL tj = min 

P  

> iÔłłNd

q¤ä

> (tÔłĺL)ij

dtj 

, 1

!

, ÔłÇj Ôłł N r ,

(52) where dtv denotes the corresponding demand for retailer v.Formulating a model within the MDP framework can be more involved than constructing an optimisation model, because each paradigm introduces its own specific components and notation. While most optimisation-based and MDP-based for-mulations are theoretically equivalent, they do not necessarily coincide in their mathematical expression. In particular, MDP formulations frequently express the governing relations in a sequential manner. 19 

APPENDIX BPROOFS 

A. Proof of Lemma 1 Proof of Lemma 1: hypervolume monotonicity. By definition, 

HV (S; xref ) = ╬╗(D(S)) , where ╬╗(┬Ě) denotes the Lebesgue measure and D(S) is the region dominated by S with respect to xref . Since K ÔŐć H , every point dominated by K is also dominated by H. Hence, 

D(K) ÔŐć D (H). (53) By monotonicity of Lebesgue measure, this implies 

╬╗(D(K)) ÔëĄ ╬╗(D(H)) . (54) Therefore, 

HV (K; xref ) ÔëĄ HV (H; xref ). (55) 

B. Proof of Lemma 2 Proof of Lemma 2: Strict hypervolume gain. The equality 

HV (H Ôł¬ { x}; xref ) = HV (H; xref ) + Ôłć HV (x | H ) (56) follows directly from the definition of hypervolume contribu-tion. It remains to show that ÔłćHV (x | H ) > 0.Since x /Ôłł Dom( H), no point in H dominates x. Since x is also strictly better than the reference point in every objective, the box bounded by xref and x has strictly positive volume. Moreover, because x is not dominated by any point in H, there exists a nonzero subregion of this box that is dominated by x

but not by any point in H. Hence, the exclusive hypervolume contribution of x is strictly positive, i.e., 

ÔłćHV (x | H ) > 0. (57) Therefore, adding x to H strictly increases the hypervolume. 

C. Proof of Proposition 1 Proof of Proposition 1: Population improvement probability. 

By the complement rule, 

Pr 

> P

[

> i=1

Xi

!

= 1 Ôłĺ Pr 

> P

\

> i=1

Xci

!

. (58) Under independence, 

Pr 

> P

\

> i=1

Xci

!

=

> P

Y

> i=1

Pr( Xci ) = 

> P

Y

> i=1

(1 Ôłĺ Pr( Xi)) . (59) Since Pr( Xi) Ôëą ¤ü for all i, we have 1 Ôłĺ Pr( Xi) ÔëĄ 1 Ôłĺ ¤ü,hence 

Pr 

> P

\

> i=1

Xci

!

ÔëĄ (1 Ôłĺ ¤ü)P . (60) Therefore, 

Pr 

> P

[

> i=1

Xi

!

Ôëą 1 Ôłĺ (1 Ôłĺ ¤ü)P . (61) For P = 1 , this reduces to Pr( X1) Ôëą ¤ü. For P > 1 and 

¤ü Ôłł (0 , 1) , we have (1 Ôłĺ ¤ü)P < 1 Ôłĺ ¤ü, so 

1 Ôłĺ (1 Ôłĺ ¤ü)P > ¤ü. (62) This completes the proof. 

D. Proof of Proposition 2 Proof of Proposition 2: Gradient inference. The result fol-lows directly from the identity 

Ôłągj + gkÔłą2 = Ôłągj Ôłą2 + ÔłągkÔłą2 + 2 gÔŐĄ 

> j

gk, (63) together with the assumption gÔŐĄ 

> j

gk < 0.20 

APPENDIX CSIMULATED ENVIRONMENT 

Our experiment employs three SC environments: simple, moderate, and complex networks. SC networks are node collections linked by edges, with parameters set at nodes and edges. Each network is ÔÇÖfully connectedÔÇÖ, linking all nodes across consecutive layers. Material supply from suppliers is treated as unlimited. Market demand is unstable: markets one and two fluctuate as normal distributions ( ╬╝ = 150 , ¤â = 60 

and ╬╝ = 100 , ¤â = 40 ) and markets three, four, and five as Poisson distributions ( ╬╗ = 200 , 100 , 150 ). Seasonal demand shifts through sinusoidal-modulated distributions. Simple SC serves markets 1 and 2, moderate SC covers markets 1-3, and complex SC involves all markets. For simple SC markets, a fixed mean price of 20 is applied, while moderate and complex SC markets encounter variable mean prices: [20 , 21 , 20 .5] and [100 , 101 , 105 , 103 , 104] . Un-fulfilled demand is regarded as demand loss. This problem is structured within the MOMDP framework with a finite time horizon T = 100 and a lead time range of L = {1, 3} days. The transportation capacity ( Cap ) is set at 200, while the manufacturing capacity is not restricted. To simulate uncertainties originating mainly from demand, cost, price structure, and lead time, we randomise the parame-ters during environment generations. For example, in addition to the fluctuation of demand along the period horizon, we also introduce randomised mean and standard deviation values within a range of {90% , 110% } of set values. A similar range is also applied to the costs and prices, subject to the task arrangement scenarios applied. During fine-tuning, new unseen tasks are given in the Table VII to XII. TABLE VII: Simple SC. Node parameter values that corre-spond to the facilities in Simple SC environment.                               

> Node I0jc¤éje¤éjc¤łkv¤łke¤łk
> 3380 0.1100 0.0002 2.0000 1.0000 5.0126 4350 0.1300 0.0002 2.2000 1.0000 4.5754 5400 0.1200 0.0002 NA NA NA 680 0.1500 0.0002 NA NA NA

TABLE VIII: Simple SC. Transport parameter values that correspond to product delivery.                   

> From Node To Node c¤äij e¤äij
> 120.2200 0.1258 30.6900 0.3947 241.0550 0.6035 50.4300 0.2460 340.4850 0.2774 50.7500 0.4290

TABLE IX: Moderate SC. Node parameter values that cor-respond to the facilities in Moderate SC environment.                                                       

> Node I0jc¤éje¤éjc¤łkv¤łke¤łk
> 3380 0.1100 0.0002 2.0000 1.0000 5.0126 4350 0.1300 0.0002 2.2000 1.0000 4.5754 5400 0.1200 0.0002 2.3000 1.0000 5.4491 680 0.1500 0.0002 NA NA NA 7110 0.2000 0.0002 NA NA NA 8100 0.2500 0.0002 NA NA NA 980 0.3000 0.0002 NA NA NA 10 120 0.2000 0.0002 NA NA NA

TABLE X: Moderate SC. Transport parameter values that correspond to product delivery.                                           

> From Node To Node c¤äij e¤äij
> 130.2200 0.1258 40.6900 0.3947 50.5650 0.3232 231.0550 0.6035 40.6500 0.3718 50.6300 0.3604 360.0750 0.0429 70.4300 0.2460 460.6300 0.3604 70.2300 0.1316 560.4950 0.2831 70.0750 0.0429 681.0950 0.6263 90.6250 0.3575 10 0.9500 0.5434 781.6400 0.9381 91.1600 0.6635 10 0.5800 0.3318

TABLE XI: Complex SC. Node parameter values that corre-spond to the facilities in Complex SC environment.                                                                                                       

> Node I0jc¤éje¤éjc¤łkv¤łke¤łk
> 4155 0.2300 0.0002 2.0000 1.0000 5.0126 5267 0.3500 0.0002 2.2000 1.0000 4.5754 6342 0.2200 0.0002 2.1000 1.0000 5.4491 7211 0.1100 0.0002 2.0000 1.0000 6.1232 8162 0.2900 0.0002 2.3000 1.0000 5.5157 9195 0.3700 0.0002 NA NA NA 10 333 0.1100 0.0002 NA NA NA 11 96 0.3600 0.0002 NA NA NA 12 285 0.3300 0.0002 NA NA NA 13 68 0.2600 0.0002 NA NA NA 14 379 0.3000 0.0002 NA NA NA 15 344 0.1700 0.0002 NA NA NA 16 66 0.2900 0.0002 NA NA NA 17 356 0.2700 0.0002 NA NA NA 18 382 0.2300 0.0002 NA NA NA 19 362 0.3700 0.0002 NA NA NA 21

TABLE XII: Complex SC. Transport parameter values that correspond to product delivery. 

From Node To Node c¤äij e¤äij 

14 0.5350 0.3060 5 0.2650 0.1516 6 1.8450 1.0553 7 1.6000 0.9152 8 1.4400 0.8237 24 0.3600 0.2059 5 0.2950 0.1687 6 1.2350 0.7064 7 0.6250 0.3575 8 1.8550 1.0611 34 0.6000 0.3432 5 0.1750 0.1001 6 0.7450 0.4261 7 1.3300 0.7608 8 0.1700 0.0972 49 1.9900 1.1383 10 0.3400 0.1945 11 0.8100 0.4633 59 1.5150 0.8666 10 0.6600 0.3775 11 0.6450 0.3689 69 1.6950 0.9695 10 1.5800 0.9038 11 0.8150 0.4662 79 1.6150 0.9238 10 1.2600 0.7207 11 0.6750 0.3861 89 1.0300 0.5892 10 1.0900 0.6235 11 1.6300 0.9324 912 1.9650 1.1240 13 1.9250 1.1011 14 1.6200 0.9266 10 8 1.4900 0.8523 9 1.9600 1.1211 10 0.6350 0.3632 

TABLE XII: Table XII continued.. 

11 8 1.8700 1.0696 9 0.2000 0.1144 10 1.8550 1.0611 12 15 1.9450 1.1125 16 0.9650 0.5520 17 1.9050 1.0897 18 0.9000 0.5148 19 0.6900 0.3947 13 15 0.8050 0.4605 16 1.0650 0.6092 17 1.8400 1.0525 18 0.8300 0.4748 19 1.8850 1.0782 14 15 1.6600 0.9495 16 1.5100 0.8637 17 0.5900 0.3375 18 0.4000 0.2288 19 1.3950 0.7979 22 

APPENDIX DDETAILED ALGORITHM SETTINGS FOR SC E XPERIMENTS 

This section provides the detailed hyperparameters used in our experiment. 

A. Meta-training settings 

Table XIII and XIV show the algorithm settings we used for Meta-MORL and MERLION during our experiments. TABLE XIII: Hyperparameters for MAML-based meta-training. 

Hyperparameter Value 

Shared parameters: 

Inner-loop learning rate ╬▒ 0.03 Outer-loop learning rate ╬▓ 0.001 PPO steps per meta-update 10 Adaptation steps 4ÔÇô8 Network architecture [64, 64] Discount factor ╬│ 0.99 GAE weight 1.0 VF loss coefficient 0.5 Clipping parameter 0.3 KL target 0.01 KL coefficient 0.001 Batch size 32 Fragment length 100 Rollout workers 4Evaluation interval 100 

MERLION-specific: 

Population size 10 Fitting score coefficient ╬║ 0.5 Cross-over rate ╬Ěcross 0.6 Mutation strength ╬┤ 0.1 

B. Fine-tuning settings 

TABLE XIV: PPO hyperparameters used in fine-tuning. 

Hyperparameter Value Learning rate 3 ├Ś 10 Ôłĺ4

Minibatch size 64 Epochs per update 10 Discount factor ╬│ 0.99 GAE weight ╬╗ 0.95 Clipping range 0.2 Entropy coefficient 0VF loss coefficient 0.5 Max gradient norm 0.5 Episode length 100 Total timesteps 5 ├Ś 10 5

Activation Tanh 

C. MORL with decomposition (MORL/D) setup 

Table XV shows the setup used for the MORL/D algorithm as one of the baselines. TABLE XV: Hyperparameters of MORL/D Algorithm with MOSAC Policy 

Hyperparameters Values 

MORL/D 

Discount factor 0.995 Population size 6Exchange every 5 ├Ś 10 4

Total time steps 5 ├Ś 10 5

Neighbourhood size 1Update passes 10 Initial weight dist. uniform 

MOSAC 

Buffer size 10 6

Discount factor 0.99 Target smoothing coef. 0.005 Batch size 128 Steps before learning 10 3

Hidden neurons [256; 256] Actor LR 3 ├Ś 10 Ôłĺ4

Critic LR 10 Ôłĺ3

Actor training freq. 2Target training freq. 1Activation function ReLU 

D. Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) setup 

Table XVI shows the setup used in NSGA-II as one of the baselines. TABLE XVI: Hyperparameters of NSGA-II to solve the SC problem across three network complexities: simple, moderate, and complex. 

Hyperparameters Values Population size 300 Offspring number 30 Cross-over operator binary (SBX) Cross-over probability 90% Cross-over ╬Ěcross 15 Mutation method polynomial Mutation ╬Ěmut 20 23 

APPENDIX EDETAILED EXPERIMENTAL SETTING FOR CONVENTIONAL 

RL IN STANDARD PROBLEMS 

A. Algorithm settings 

This appendix reports the hyperparameter settings of the benchmark algorithms used in the standard RL problem ex-periments. Unless otherwise stated, all methods were imple-mented using the morl-baselines framework and eval-uated on the same mo-gymnasium environments as Meta-MORL and MERLION. Table XVII to XXII displayed the used hyperparameter for standard problem benchmarking. TABLE XVII: Hyperparameters of MORL/D with MOSAC or MOSAC-Discrete policy                 

> Hyperparameter Value
> MORL/D
> Scalarisation method Weighted sum Utility type SER Population size 10 Exchange every 4├Ś10 4
> Neighbourhood size 1Update passes 10 Initial weight distribution Uniform Shared buffer False
> Policy backbone
> Policy type MOSAC / MOSAC-Discrete Network architecture [64, 64] Policy learning rate 10 Ôłĺ4
> Critic learning rate 10 Ôłĺ2
> Discount factor 0.99

TABLE XVIII: Hyperparameters of the PGMORL algorithm                    

> Hyperparameter Value Number of environments 4Population size 10 Warm-up iterations 0.05 ├Śepisode horizon Steps per iteration Episode horizon Evolutionary iterations 20 Number of weights candidates 21 (2 objectives), 32 (otherwise) Performance buffer size 100 Number of performance buffers 2Weight range [0, 1]
> Ôłćw1/9
> Sparsity coefficient Ôłĺ1.0
> Network architecture [64, 64] Number of minibatches 32 Update epochs 10 Learning rate 3├Ś10 Ôłĺ4

TABLE XIX: Hyperparameters of the CAPQL algorithm                

> Hyperparameter Value Learning rate 3├Ś10 Ôłĺ4
> Target smoothing coefficient ( ¤ä)0.005 Replay buffer size 10 6
> Network architecture [64, 64] Batch size Episode horizon Number of Q-networks 2Entropy coefficient ( ╬▒)0.2 Learning starts after 10 3steps Gradient updates per step 1Discount factor 0.99

TABLE XX: Hyperparameters of the PQL algorithm        

> Hyperparameter Value Initial ¤Á1.0 Final ¤Á0.1 Epsilon decay steps 10 5
> Discount factor 0.99

TABLE XXI: Hyperparameters of the MPMOQL algorithm             

> Hyperparameter Value Learning rate 0.1 Initial ¤Á0.1 Final ¤Á0.1 Epsilon decay None Weight selection Random GPI policy False Transfer Q-table True Dyna updates False Discount factor 0.99

TABLE XXII: Hyperparameters of the PCN algorithm        

> Hyperparameter Value Scaling factor [1.0] Learning rate 10 Ôłĺ3
> Batch size Episode horizon Hidden dimension 64 Exploration noise 0.1 Continuous action setting Environment-dependent

B. Benchmark problem descriptions 

We evaluated the benchmark Merlion and other algorithms on five standard problems from mo-gymnasium :

mo-halfcheetah-v4 , deep-sea-treasure-v0 ,

resource-gathering-v0 , mo-hopper-v4 , and 

mo-reacher-v4 . These tasks were selected to cover both discrete and continuous domains, as well as different numbers of objectives, ranging from two to four. This allows us to assess performance under diverse Pareto-front structures and control settings. 

1) MO-HalfCheetah.: mo-halfcheetah-v4 is acontinuous-control MuJoCo locomotion task with acontinuous observation space, a continuous action space, and two objectives. In our implementation, it is treated as a long-horizon control problem with a maximum episode length of 1000 steps. This environment is useful for testing whether a method can recover meaningful trade-offs between competing locomotion objectives in a standard continuous benchmark. 

2) Deep Sea Treasure.: deep-sea-treasure-v0 is a discrete grid-world problem with discrete observations, dis-crete actions, and two objectives. It is one of the canonical MORL benchmarks because it provides a structured Pareto front with a clear trade-off between treasure value and time penalty. We used a maximum episode length of 200 steps. 

3) Resource Gathering.: resource-gathering-v0 is a discrete grid-world environment with discrete observations, discrete actions, and three objectives. The task requires bal-ancing multiple resource-related returns while avoiding un-favourable outcomes, making it a useful benchmark for testing 24 

TABLE XXIII: RL standard problem environments details.                         

> Env. Obs. Act. Obj. Timesteps/eps.
> mo-halfcheetah-v4 Cont. Cont. 21000
> deep-sea-treasure-v0 Disc. Disc. 2200
> resource-gathering-v0 Disc. Disc. 3200
> mo-hopper-v4 Cont. Cont. 31000
> mo-reacher-v4 Cont. Disc. 4200

whether a method can identify non-dominated policies beyond the two-objective setting. We used a maximum episode length of 200 steps. 

4) MO-Hopper.: mo-hopper-v4 is a continuous-control MuJoCo locomotion task with continuous observations, continuous actions, and three objectives. Compared with 

mo-halfcheetah-v4 , this environment introduces a more challenging multi-objective control setting with an additional objective and longer-horizon dynamics. We used a maximum episode length of 1000 steps. 

5) MO-Reacher.: mo-reacher-v4 is a multi-objective reaching task with a continuous observation space, a discrete action space in our benchmark interface, and four objectives. This task provides the highest reward dimensionality among the standard problems considered here, making it suitable for evaluating how well each method scales to more structured and higher-dimensional Pareto fronts. We used a maximum episode length of 200 steps. 

6) Common environment configuration.: All environments were instantiated through mo_gym.make(..., render_mode="rgb_array") and wrapped with 

TimeLimit using an environment-specific maximum episode length. No reward normalisation or scalarisation was applied at the environment level for benchmark evaluation, and comparisons were based on the cumulative raw vector rewards returned by the environments. The observation space type, action space type, number of objectives, episode horizon, and reference point used for each environment are summarised in Table XXIII. 

7) Common benchmark configuration.: Across all bench-mark algorithms, we used the same environment definitions, episode horizons, and random-seed interface. The discount factor was set to ╬│ = 0.99 for all methods. Algorithm applicability depended on the observation and action spaces of each task. In particular, PQL and MPMOQL were only used on discrete-observation, discrete-action environments, while PGMORL and CAPQL were only used on continuous-observation, continuous-action environments. MORL/D and PCN were applied whenever their architectural assumptions matched the corresponding environment. 25           

> (a) Simple SC - view 2 (b) Moderate SC - view 2 (c) Complex SC - view 2
> (d) Simple SC - view 3 (e) Moderate SC - view 3 (f) Complex SC - view 3)

Fig. 5: Additional views from the other perspectives to complement PF Plots in the main text. APPENDIX FPARETO FRONT PLOTS 

To compliment the PF plots in the main text, we provide additional views of PF plots for better representation as shown in Figure 5. 26 

APPENDIX GOPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE 

We further examine the operational trajectories underlying the representative solutions selected from the PF approxima-tion sets. Figure 6 presents the corresponding manufacturing quantities, inventory levels, and demand loss over time. Manufacturing fluctuations are more pronounced in the simple SC setting, while the moderate and complex settings display steadier production schedules. One reason is that, in deeper and more interconnected networks, decisions propagate through additional stages, transit delays, and downstream buffers, so abrupt short-term changes may create delayed and amplified side effects. As a result, effective policies tend to resemble more stable base-stock or level-production strategies, using inventories and shipments to absorb variability rather than relying on frequent production corrections. In addition, the feasible action space becomes tighter as complexity in-creases because more facilities, routes, and interdependencies impose stronger operational constraints. These factors also make policy learning more difficult, and PPO-style updates may become effectively more conservative under noisier gradi-ent signals, encouraging reliance on steadier control heuristics. The inventory plots further indicate that buffering behaviour changes with complexity. In the simple SC setting, inventories stay close to zero for much of the horizon, interrupted by occa-sional spikes, which is consistent with reactive replenishment and rapid stock clearing. In the moderate and complex set-tings, inventories become more persistent and are increasingly concentrated at a smaller subset of facilities. This suggests that the learned policies exploit positional buffering, where selected nodes absorb variability locally rather than maintaining evenly distributed stock across the network. Demand loss remains bounded overall, but its spatial dis-tribution becomes more heterogeneous in the more complex settings. Some markets exhibit consistently higher unmet de-mand, whereas others maintain relatively low and stable losses. This indicates that, under stronger coupling and delayed flow adjustments, the learned policy does not equalise service levels uniformly across all markets, but instead allocates service unevenly across locations as part of its broader multi-objective trade-off. 27 

(a) Mfg - simple SC (b) Mfg - moderate SC (c) Mfg - complex SC 

(d) Inv - simple SC (e) Inv - moderate SC (f) Inv - complex SC Market A 

> Market B
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> Units

(g) Loss - simple SC Market A  

> Market B
> Market C
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> Units

(h) Loss - moderate SC Market A  

> Market B
> Market C
> Market D
> Market E
> 0
> 100
> 200
> Units

(i) Loss - complex SC 

Fig. 6: MERLIONÔÇÖs operational performance across the SC problems shows that manufacturing and inventory levels fluctuate less in more complex problems, although some stockpiling becomes more noticeable. Demand losses in the various markets are relatively low.