Title: Diffusion Offline Reinforcement Learning for Fair and Energy-Efficient UAV-Assisted Wireless Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.16331v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 01:50:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Diffusion Offline Reinforcement Learning for Fair and Energy-Efficient UAV-Assisted Wireless Networks 

Eslam Eldeeb and Hirley Alves 

Abstract —The integration of generative artificial intelligence with wireless communication and signal processing systems has opened new avenues for intelligent, data-driven decision-making in future 6G networks. This work proposes a diffusion soft actor-critic (Diffusion-SAC) approach that leverages offline reinforce-ment learning (RL) enhanced by denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) to optimize trajectory and scheduling control in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) networks. While offline RL methods, such as conservative Q-learning (CQL), can learn from static datasets, they often struggle to generalize in low-data or dynamic conditions. To address this, we combine the robustness of CQL with the generative power of diffusion models, enabling expressive and signal-aware policy learning that generalizes beyond behavior policies. Applied to a UAV-assisted wireless network, the proposed framework minimizes transmission en-ergy and improves fairness among devices. Simulations show that Diffusion-SAC outperforms standard offline RL baselines, achieving more stable convergence and higher rewards even with limited datasets. The method enhances data efficiency, reduces energy consumption, and increases throughput by more than 35% 

compared to existing algorithms, demonstrating its potential for robust policy learning in next-generation wireless control systems. 

Index Terms —Diffusion models, offline reinforcement learning, soft actor-critic, energy minimization, unmanned aerial vehicles 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Recent advances in generative modeling have enabled ex-pressive data-driven representations for complex signal pro-cessing and control tasks in future wireless networks [1], [2]. Among these models, diffusion models (DMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities in modeling high-dimensional structured distributions through iterative denoising processes. In wireless communications, generative models have shown promise in applications such as channel estimation and pre-diction [3], beamforming and resource allocation in massive MIMO systems [4], digital twin modeling [5], and UAV-assisted networking [6]. Despite their expressive power, purely generative models remain inherently data-driven and typically rely on imitation of observed behaviors without explicitly optimizing long-term objectives [7]. In dynamic, decision-centric wireless environ-ments, where channel conditions, traffic demands, and energy constraints continuously evolve, effective control policies must 

Eslam Eldeeb and Hirley Alves are with the Centre for Wireless Commu-nications (CWC), University of Oulu, Finland. (e-mail: eslam.eldeeb@oulu.fi; hirley.alves@oulu.fi). This work was supported by 6G Flagship (Grant Number 369116) funded by the Research Council of Finland, and supported by the Business Finland project, 6G-FISRE. 

adapt beyond the behavior observed in static datasets [8]. For example, in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-assisted networks, mobility decisions must account for time-varying channel conditions, device requirements, and energy constraints. UAVs provide flexible relay capabilities by repositioning to serve distant or low-power devices, thereby improving link quality and enhancing communication reliability through adaptive spatial signal processing [9]. In such UAV-assisted wireless networks, trajectory planning and signal-aware mobility control are critical components of efficient system design. UAV mobility introduces an additional degree of freedom that can be exploited to optimize key performance metrics, including coverage, latency, energy effi-ciency, and information freshness [10]. However, determining optimal UAV paths is challenging due to dynamic wireless environments, heterogeneous quality-of-service (QoS) require-ments, and strict energy constraints. Moreover, UAVs often operate under limited environmental knowledge, necessitating algorithms that are both data-efficient and generalize to unseen scenarios [11]. These challenges motivate the development of intelligent decision-making frameworks that learn effective movement strategies from historical data while maintaining adaptability during deployment [12], [13]. To address the need for goal-directed improvement, rein-forcement learning (RL) provides a mathematically grounded framework for sequential decision-making [14]. An RL agent interacts with an environment by observing states, selecting actions, and receiving rewards, with the objective of maxi-mizing cumulative long-term returns. In its traditional online form, RL enables exploration-driven policy refinement and can discover strategies that surpass those observed in training data, making it particularly suitable for adaptive signal processing and wireless control tasks. However, online RL can be costly, time-consuming, and po-tentially unsafe in resource-constrained domains such as UAV-assisted wireless systems. Furthermore, purely online training disregards valuable offline datasets that may be available from prior deployments or simulation logs. Offline RL addresses this limitation by enabling policy learning entirely from static datasets, without requiring live interaction with the environ-ment [15]. By decoupling learning from active exploration, offline RL facilitates safer and more practical deployment in wireless signal processing and control systems [16]. Nevertheless, naively applying standard RL algorithms to offline data often leads to distributional shift and extrapola-tion errors [15]. Conservative offline RL methods, such as 

> arXiv:2606.16331v1 [cs.LG] 15 Jun 2026 2

conservative Q-learning (CQL) and implicit Q-learning (IQL), mitigate these issues by constraining value estimation and reducing over-optimism [17]. While these approaches enhance stability and safety, their performance may still be limited by restrictive policy parameterizations when modeling complex or structured action distributions. In addition, their effectiveness depends on the richness and diversity of the offline dataset. Diffusion models offer an expressive alternative for policy representation. Their iterative denoising mechanism enables flexible modeling of complex action distributions over contin-uous or hybrid spaces, making them promising candidates for structured wireless control problems. In this work, we propose a novel offline RL framework, named Diffusion-SAC, that combines the generative capabili-ties of diffusion models with the robustness of conservative Q-learning for adaptive signal processing and control in wireless UAV networks. Our contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We introduce a diffusion-based policy parameterization for hybrid discrete-continuous offline RL, enabling joint UAV trajectory and scheduling optimization under real-istic wireless constraints.  

> •

We provide a systematic analysis of the interaction be-tween behavior cloning, Q-guidance, and conservative regularization, revealing that diffusion models can act as implicit distributional regularizers, reducing the reliance on explicit CQL penalties in offline signal processing control.  

> •

We demonstrate that diffusion-based policies exhibit ro-bust generalization under limited and imperfect datasets, and we quantify the effects of dataset size, dataset quality, and denoising depth on convergence stability and energy-AoI trade-offs.  

> •

Simulation results demonstrate the superiority of our method over conventional SAC and behavior cloning baselines. An ablation study further illustrates the benefits of diffusion policy modeling in sparse-data scenarios. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II reviews related literature. Section III introduces the system model and problem formulation. Section IV provides the necessary background on SAC, CQL, and diffusion models. Section V details our proposed Diffusion-SAC algorithm. Numerical evaluations are provided in Section VI, and Sec-tion VII concludes the paper. II. R ELATED WORK 

In this section, we provide an overview of the recent progress in offline RL, diffusion models, and diffusion RL in solving signal processing and wireless communications-related problems. 

A. Offline Reinforcement Learning 

Offline RL, also known as batch RL, is a subdomain of RL in which agents learn optimal policies offline, without inter-acting with the environment. Offline RL addresses concerns in online RL, such as unsafe and costly exploration. Training RL agents using offline, pre-collected datasets often introduces distributional shift and estimation bias due to the discrepancy between the learned policies and the behavior policies used to collect the datasets. Famous methods, including CQL [18] and IQL [19], solve this problem by explicitly penalizing the Q-values of the out-of-distribution (OOD) actions and implicitly constraining the Q-function to the observed dataset, respec-tively. On the other hand, classifier-free diffusion guidance has been used to narrow the offline-to-online distribution gap, yielding consistent gains during fine-tuning [20]. Offline RL has been introduced recently to the wireless domain as an efficient and safe decision-maker. The authors of [21] introduce offline RL with CQL to enable efficient computation offloading for AR tasks over Terahertz wireless networks. The work in [22] evaluates offline RL algorithms by mixing offline datasets for radio resource management optimization, while the authors in [23] present a resilient meta-offline RL approach for UAV trajectory planning that enhances spatial signal processing and energy efficiency. While conservative offline RL algorithms, such as CQL, have shown promise in mitigating distributional shift and overestimation issues, they often rely on simplistic policy parameterizations that may be insufficient in complex or high-dimensional spaces. In particular, modeling complex or highly structured action distributions with conventional architectures can lead to suboptimal policies that fail to fully exploit the richness of the dataset. Additionally, offline datasets often contain suboptimal or biased trajectories, making it difficult for the agent to distinguish between high-quality and low-quality actions. These challenges lead to instability and poor gen-eralization, particularly in high-dimensional or sparse-reward settings. 

B. Diffusion Models 

Diffusion models have emerged as powerful generative signal-processing tools for image, video, and text genera-tion [24]. Inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics, they outperform other generative models, such as generative adver-sarial networks (GANs), by learning structured denoising map-pings from random noise to high-quality data representations. The denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) [25] is a popular diffusion model originally designed for image generation. It includes forward and reverse processes. In the former, stochastic perturbations (noise) are gradually added to the data until it becomes Gaussian, whereas the latter uses a learning model to recover the original data from the noise. Relying on this capability, the model can generate data from pure noise. Diffusion models have emerged as key enablers in next-generation wireless signal processing and communications. To this end, the authors of [26] propose diffusion models to mitigate wireless channel noise in image semantic commu-nications. The work in [27] designs a latent diffusion model that performs few-step low-latency denoising over noisy chan-nels. In [28], diffusion models are used for wireless channel modeling and sampling, while the authors of [29] propose an adaptive modulation and coding scheme using latency-aware diffusion models for extremely low-data-rate semantic communication. Authors in [30] adopt diffusion to optimize a large-scale 3D-reflective intelligent surface (RIS) deployment. A recent survey consolidates diffusion models for wireless 3ℎ                           

> 𝑅 𝑡
> 𝑘𝑢
> 𝑑 𝑡
> 𝑘𝑢
> 𝜃 𝑡
> 𝑘 =sin −1ℎ
> 𝑅 𝑡
> 𝑘𝑢
> Fig. 1: UAV-IoT system model. A single UAV moves at altitude hwhile serving Kground devices located at {(xk, y k)}Kk=1 . At time t, the UAV position is (xut, y ut), the link distance to device kis Rtku , and the elevation angle is θtk. Links consist of small-scale fading and a path loss that may be LoS/NLoS with probability dependent on θtk. The corresponding path-loss and rate models are used for scheduling and energy accounting. Each device maintains an AoI state Atkwith optional fairness weights δk. The control action selects a continuous UAV motion and a discrete transmission decision (one of the Kdevices or idle).

networks, including channel modeling, integrated sensing and communications (ISAC), resource management, and RL-based control, underlining their growing role in statistical signal processing and optimization [31]. 

C. Diffusion Reinforcement Learning 

Recently, diffusion models have gained further attention in the RL domain. Diffusion Q-learning (DQL) is a break-through in diffusion RL, where the authors propose a policy regularization using behavior cloning for offline RL via a conditional diffusion model. Later, diffusion models have been used to completely express actors in actor-critic algorithms and generate policies [32]. Adopting diffusion RL to the wireless domain has been limited. The work in [33] proposed a diffusion RL frame-work for AI-generated content services. Similarly, the authors of [34] propose a diffusion-based online RL algorithm to enhance cooperative offloading and resource allocation, while the authors of [35] exploit diffusion models with online RL for radio resource management in radio access network (RAN) slicing. Additionally, [36] explores a diffusion-RL scheme for resource blocks and power allocation, reporting improvements over deep Q-network (DQN) and semi-supervised variational autoencoder baselines. In contrast to existing diffusion-RL approaches that primarily target online RL settings or purely continuous control domains, our work focuses on offline hybrid control for wireless signal optimization, where safety, dataset bias, and distributional shift are critical concerns. III. S YSTEM MODEL 

We consider a 3D control environment, as illustrated in Fig. 1, where K fixed, limited-power devices are served by a rotary-wing UAV flying at a fixed altitude h and with a horizontal speed of vu meters per second. The coordinates of each device k are denoted by (xk, y k), while the projected 2D coordinates of the UAV at time t are given by (xut , y ut ). At each decision step, the UAV selects one device to receive data from. The duration of each time step varies with the quality of the wireless channel, propagation characteristics, and the UAV’s current movement decision, as explained below. The objective is to jointly optimize the UAV’s trajectory and scheduling decisions. Specifically, the UAV must sequentially choose its movement direction (continuous action) and the device to schedule for communication st ∈ 1, . . . , K (discrete action). We model the problem as an episodic environment: each episode begins with the UAV in a randomly initialized position and terminates after a fixed duration, thereby cap-turing the temporal evolution of spatial signal conditions and control actions within a constrained flight window. 

A. Channel Model 

We consider both line-of-sight (LoS) and non-line-of-sight (NLoS) ground-to-air wireless propagation links between the devices and the UAV. The probability of having LoS or NLoS communication between device k and the UAV at time t is, respectively, [10]: 

pku t =  1 + C exp  −D(θkt − C) −1 if LoS , (1) 

¯pku t = 1 − pku t if NLoS . (2) where C and D are environment-specific constants, and 

θkt is the elevation angle between device k and the UAV at time t computed as θkt = arcsin 

 hRku t



, where R is the Euclidean distance between device k and the UAV at time t given by Rku t = √h2 + d2, where d = dku t =p(xk − xut )2 + ( yk − yut )2 denotes the horizontal distance between device k and the UAV at time t. Following [37], [38], the path loss for LoS and NLoS scenarios is formulated as: 

Ξku t (ξ) = 20 log 10 

 4πf cRku t

vl



+ ξ [dB] , (3) where fc is the carrier frequency, vl is the speed of light, and ξ is the path loss that can be either ξLoS or ξNLoS for LoS and NLoS scenarios, respectively. Hence, the average path loss between device k and the UAV at time t is computed as: 

¯Lku t = pku t Ξku t (ξLoS ) + ¯ pku t Ξku t (ξNLoS ) [dB] . (4) Using the average path loss, the average transmission rate in bits per second (bps) for device k at time t is calculated as: 

rkt = B log 2(1 + γkt ) [bps] , (5) where B is the available bandwidth in Hertz (Hz) and γkt is the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) given by γkt = |hku t |2¯lku t Pσ2 ,where ¯lku t = 10 − ¯Lku t /10 , hku t is the small-scale fading, P is the device transmission power and σ2 = N0B is the noise power with power spectral density (PSD) N0.

B. Energy Calculation 

The total energy consumption of the UAV is decomposed into communication-related (transmission and signal process-ing) and movement-related components. The communication-related energy consumption at time step t is given by: 

Ecom  

> t

= T k

> com

(Phover + Pcom ) [J] , (6) 4

where T k 

> com

= Dk/r kt is the hovering time of the UAV needed for a device k to complete its data transmission, Dk is the packet size in bits, Pcom is the communication power of the UAV, and Phover is the hovering power calculated as [39]: 

Phover =

s

(mtot g)3

2πr 2

> p

npρ [W] , (7) where mtot is the UAV mass, g is the earth gravity, rp is the propeller radius, np is the number of propellers, and ρ is the air density. The movement-related energy consumption is modeled as: 

Emove  

> t

= Tmove (Phover + Pmove ) [J] , (8) where Tmove = p(xut − xut−1)2 + ( yut − yut−1)2/v u is the time needed for the UAV to move from one position to another (at a fixed height), and Pmove is the power consumed due to movement calculated as [39]: 

Pmove = Pmax − Pidle 

vmax 

vu + Pidle [W] , (9) where Pmax and Pidle are hardware-related power values and 

vmax is the UAV maximum speed. Note that Pmove denotes the additional propulsion power above hovering, so the flight power during motion is Phover + Pmove .The total energy consumption at time is simply the sum of both components: 

Etotal  

> t

= Ecom  

> t

+ Emove  

> t

[J] . (10) Similarly, the total time consumed by the UAV to move and communicate with a device can be expressed as: 

Ttotal = T k 

> com

+ Tmove + Texec [s] , (11) where Texec is the inference time of a decision-making algo-rithm. It is worth noting that the UAV has the option to remain stationary ( i.e., hover) and to serve no devices. In that case, we assume that Ttotal = Texec .

C. Information Freshness 

Age of information (AoI) is a critical metric that quantifies the freshness of information in transmitted packets [40]. For each device k, its AoI is estimated as the difference between the current system time and the timestamp of the most recently received packet, effectively reflecting the timeliness of signal updates and state estimation. The individual AoI is calculated as: 

Akt+1 =

(

0, if device k is served ,

min {Amax , A kt + Ttotal (t)}, otherwise ;

(12) where Amax is a predefined upper limit on AoI to ensure bounded modeling. Incorporating AoI alongside energy in the optimization objective is crucial for promoting fairness in user scheduling and maintaining up-to-date signal-state awareness across networked devices [12], [40]. 

D. Problem Definition 

The objective is to jointly optimize the UAV trajectory and scheduling policy by determining the UAV movement directions wxt , w yt and the served device st, so as to minimize both the UAV energy consumption and the average AoI of the devices. The problem is formulated as: 

P1 : min   

> wxt,w yt,s t
> H

X

> t=1

"

λ

> K

X

> k=1

δkAkt + (1 − λ) Etotal 

> t

#

,

(13a) s.t. 

> H

X

> t=1

Ttotal (t) ≤ Tth , (13b) where λ is a weighting factor that balances information freshness and energy efficiency, and δk ∈ [0 , 1] is a priority weight for device k. The variable H denotes the number of decision steps in an episode. Each step t has a duration Ttotal (t)

in seconds, and an episode terminates once the accumulated physical time exceeds the time budget Tth .Problem P1 in (13) is NP-hard due to its combinatorial nature and the complex interaction between UAV movement, scheduling, wireless channel dynamics, and coupled signal-processing constraints. Obtaining exact solutions is computa-tionally intractable. Therefore, to address this challenge, we propose a Diffusion-SAC approach that leverages offline RL and diffusion models to learn data-driven, near-optimal signal-control policies from offline data. IV. B ACKGROUND 

In this section, we review the essential concepts of offline RL and diffusion models to introduce the proposed diffusion-based RL algorithm for adaptive signal processing and control in the next section. 

A. Online RL 

Consider a discrete-time environment modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP) defined by the tuple ⟨S , A, R, O⟩ ,where S, A, R, O represent, respectively, the sets of state, actions, rewards, and observations. At each time step t ∈ { 1, 2, · · · } , the agent observes a state st ∈ S, takes an action at ∈ A, transits to a new state st+1 ∈ S with transition probability Pr( st+1 |st, a t) and receives a reward rt ∈ R . The objective is to learn a policy 

π(a|s) that maximizes the expected discounted cumulative rewards (or return) J(π) = E [P∞ 

> t=0

γtrt], where γ ∈ (0 , 1) is the discount factor that controls the weight of future rewards in the objective. Several functions are used to estimate the expected return. The state-value function V (s) estimates the expected cu-mulative reward starting from a state s onward following a specific policy, whereas the state-action value function (Q-function) Q(s, a ) estimates the expected cumulative reward starting from state s taking action a, and thereafter following policy π.Q-learning methods are off-policy, value-based RL algo-rithms that estimate the optimal Q-function by minimizing the 5Data Collection  Offline Dataset  Offline Training                     

> Environment
> Critic
> Actor Behavioral
> policy 𝜋 𝛽
> state 𝑠 ,
> reward 𝑟
> action 𝑎
> 𝑠 𝑡 ,𝑎 𝑡 ,𝑠 𝑡 +1,𝑟 𝑡 Batch
> Online Deployment
> Optimal
> policy
> Fig. 2: Offline RL pipeline. An offline dataset Dof state-action-reward tuples is collected from prior interactions and used to train: (i) a state-conditioned diffusion actor πϕthat generates discrete actions via one-hot sampling and categorical projection, and (ii) a critic Qθ. At deployment, only the learned diffusion actor is used. Given state st, it runs Ndenoising steps to propose x0, which is projected to a valid action atin the action space.

temporal difference (TD) error. In large dimension problems, function approximators are used to model the Q-function or the policy. For example, in deep RL, such as DQNs [41], the Q-function is modeled as a neural network. Similarly, actor-critic methods use neural networks to model both the Q-function and the policy. To improve estimation stability in noisy or stochastic environments, experience replay and target Q-networks are proposed. The former saves the agent’s experiences during training to enhance the Q-function esti-mation. The latter decouples the dependencies between the Q-function estimator and the target values, thereby stabilizing training [41]. The parameters are trained using the following loss: 

Lq = ˆE

r + γ max  

> a′∈A

Qϕ′ (s′, a ′)

| {z }

> Ψ

−Qϕ(s, a )



> 2

 , (14) where Qϕ′ is the target Q-network parameterized with ϕ′, Qϕ

is the Q-network parameterized with ϕ, and Ψ is the TD error. 

B. Offline RL via CQL 

Consider an offline dataset D composed of the experience tuple ⟨st, a t, r t, s t+1 ⟩ collected via a behavior policy πβ as in Fig. 2. In that case, the offline dataset will be used by the agent to optimize the optimal control policy without allowing any online environmental interaction. Training deep RL algorithms directly in an offline manner using a static dataset generally fails due to biased Q-value estimation and overestimation problems [42]. Such problems arise from a distributional shift between the learned policy and the policies sampled from the dataset. A natural question arises: Why does this issue not occur in off-policy online RL algorithms ( e.g. , DQNs), even though there is a distribution shift between the learned policy and replay buffer contents? The answer lies in online data collection, which gradually corrects the distribution mismatch. Such an advantage is absent in offline RL [15]. Conservative Q-learning (CQL) is an offline RL framework that mitigates distributional shift by regularizing the learned Q-function to remain conservative on out-of-distribution (OOD) actions, thereby improving estimation stability. It is easy to build on top of existing deep RL frameworks, such as SAC, which is an off-policy maximum entropy algorithm [43]. In general, actor-critic algorithms combine value-based with policy-based methods. This family of algorithms models the policy using a neural network (actor) that selects the actions, 

Algorithm 1: Conservative Q-learning for Offline RL 

Input: Discount factor γ, conservative penalty constant α, Q-function learning rate ηQ, policy learning rate ηπ , number of training iterations J, and offline dataset D

Initialize: Actor parameters θ and critic parameters ϕ

for iteration j in {1,..., J} do for batch B in D do 

Update the critic parameters using the loss in (15): ϕ ← ϕ − ηQ ∇ϕ Lcritic 

Update the actor parameters using the loss in (16): θ ← θ − ηπ ∇θ Lactor 

end end Return Optimized Q-function Qϕ(s, a ) and policy 

πθ (a|s)

besides modeling the Q-function (critic) that evaluates the quality of the chosen actions [44]. They are particularly suitable for signal processing and control problems, as they enable joint estimation and optimization of decision variables under uncertainty. The critic is updated as in (14) (policy evaluation), while the actor is updated towards an action that maximizes the Q-values (policy improvement). In CQL, the critic is trained by adding a conservative term to the loss in (14) as follows: 

Lcritic = 12 Lq +αˆE



log X

> ˜a∈A

exp  Qϕ(s, ˜a)− Qϕ(s, a )



, (15) where α > 0 is a hyperparameter [18]. The actor is trained via entropy regularization loss: 

Lactor = −E



Qϕ(s, a ) − log πθ (a|s)



, (16) where πθ is the policy modeled as a neural network with parameters θ. Algorithm 1 summarizes the CQL algorithm on top of the SAC architecture. 

C. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model 

Consider x0 be the target probability distribution of the input. We define the sequence xM :0 as a Markov chain with learned Gaussian transitions with M steps. During the forward process, Gaussian noise is added at each time step to obtain 

x1, x 2, · · · , x M . The relation between two consecutive sam-ples xi−1 and xi is described using the transition probability: 

q(xi|xi−1) ∼ N (p1 − βi xi−1, β iI), (17) 6⋯                                               

> 𝑥 0𝑥 1𝑥 2𝑥 3
> 𝑥 0
> Forward Process
> Reverse Process
> Denoising Network
> 𝑥 𝑀 ~𝑁 (0,𝐼 )
> 𝑥 𝑀 ~𝑁 (0,𝐼 )
> 𝑞 𝑥 𝑖 𝑥 𝑖 −1=𝒩 𝑥 𝑖 ;1−𝛽 𝑖 𝑥 𝑖 −1,𝛽 𝑖 𝐈
> 𝑞 𝑥 𝑖 −1𝑥 𝑖 =𝒩 1
> 𝛼 𝑖 𝑥 𝑖 −𝛽 𝑖
> 1−𝛼 𝑖
> 𝜖 𝑥 𝑖 ,𝑖 ,𝛽 𝑖 𝐈
> Fig. 3: Illustration of the diffusion policy. (top) Forward process: a clean one-hot action vector x0is gradually perturbed through q(xi|xi−1)up to xM.(bottom) Reverse process: conditioned on the current state s, the actor parameterization pϕ(xi−1|xi, s )iteratively reconstructs a categorical action representation. The final x0is projected to a discrete action. The state-conditioning implements guidance toward high-value actions while staying close to the offline data.

where N (μ, Σ) denotes the normal distribution with mean 

μ = p1 − βixi−1, and covariance Σ = βiI, where I is the identity matrix. Following [25], a simple linear schedule is often used for βi, though improved schedules such as the cosine schedule have also been proposed [45]. Given the Markovian property that the current sample only depends on the previous one, the distribution of xM given x0

is given by: 

q(xM |x0) = 

> M

Y

> i=1

q(xi|xi−1). (18) A direct mapping from xM to x0 is: 

xi = √¯αix0 + p1 − ¯αi ϵ, (19) where αi = 1 − βi, ¯αi = Qik=1 αk and ϵ ∼ N (0 , I). As we increase i, the sample becomes pure noise following a normal distribution. In the reverse process (sampling), the goal is to reconstruct 

x0 from a noisy sample by removing the noise. The transition probability from xi−1 given xi can be constructed using Bayes’ theorem, where it follows a Gaussian distribution: 

q(xi−1|xi, x 0) ∼ N 1

√αi



xi − βi

√1 − ¯αi ϵ(xi, i )



, ˜βiI

!

,

(20) where the variance is 

˜βi = 1 − ¯αi−1

1 − ¯αi βi.

This construction enables obtaining x0 from pure noise; however, the noise is now ϵ(xi, i ), thus dependent on the sample and step. Hence, [25] models the noise as a parameter-ized neural network, that is, ϵθ (xi, i ), to predict the noise. In practice, the model is trained using a simplified evidence lower bound (ELBO) objective, which reduces to a mean squared error (MSE) between true and predicted noise: 

L(θ) = Ex0,ϵ,i 



ϵ − ϵθ

√¯αix0 + p1 − ¯αiϵ, i 

 2

, (21) where ϵ is sampled as N (0 , I). Fig. 3 emphasizes the forward and backward processes of the DDPM algorithm. V. D IFFUSION -SAC FOR OFFLINE UAV O PTIMIZATION 

This section presents the proposed diffusion soft actor-critic (Diffusion-SAC) algorithm for offline RL in UAV-enabled systems. We begin by formulating the problem as an MDP, followed by a detailed explanation of the Diffusion-SAC framework. 

A. MDP Formulation 

We model the UAV trajectory and scheduling problem as an MDP as described in Section IV-A. We assume an episodic environment that terminates after a predefined number of time steps. Bearing this in mind, the MDP of the optimization problem is formulated as follows: 

1) State space: The state space consists of three elements 

st = [xut , y ut , A 1 

> t

, . . . , A Kt , E total  

> t

], where the first two ele-ments correspond to the projected coordinate of the UAV, 

A1 

> t

, . . . , A Kt are the individual AoI of the K devices, and Etotal 

> t

is the total consumed energy at time t. This composite state captures both spatial and signal-level system information and serves as the sufficient statistic for decision-making. 

2) Action space: The action space consists of three ele-ments at = [ wxt , w yt , s t], where [wxt , w yt ] are the movement distances of the UAV and st ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , K } is the served device. The actions (wxt , w yt ) are continuous, while the action 

st is discrete. Therefore, we formulate a hybrid discrete-continuous RL problem, typical in joint communication-control optimization. Note that (wxt , w yt ) = (0 , 0) means that the UAV hovers without moving, while st = 0 means that the UAV serves no devices. 

3) Reward: The instantaneous reward is a weighted combi-nation of the average AoI and the UAV energy consumption: 

rt = − λT

> K

X

> k=1

δkAkt − 1 − λT Etotal  

> t

, (22) where the negative sign arises from the target of minimizing these terms, thereby maximizing the reward. This design nat-urally balances temporal information freshness with physical-layer energy efficiency. 

4) State transition probability: The state transition prob-ability affects the three elements of the state space. The UAV position is updated as (xut , y ut ) + ( wxt , w yt ). To enforce boundary constraints, a mirroring mechanism is applied: if the next position exceeds the grid limits, the UAV remains at its current location. The AoI values and energy consumption are updated using (12) and (10), respectively. 

5) Normalization: To enhance training stability and gener-alization, and to avoid large deviations between the values of the state and reward elements, we perform state and reward normalization. This procedure stabilizes training and generalizes learning across different data points, especially in 7CQL loss     

> Offline
> Dataset
> 𝑥 0
> ⋯
> 𝑥 1𝑥 2𝑥 𝑀 ~𝑁 (0,𝐼 )
> 𝑥 𝑀 ~𝑁 (0,𝐼 )𝑥 0
> Forward Process
> Reverse Process
> Denoising Network
> Probability
> over actions
> sampling

𝑎 

> Q-guidance loss
> Target
> actor
> Target
> critic
> Target Q -
> values
> Actor loss
> Q-values
> Critic loss
> Diffusion actor
> Critic
> Behavior cloning
> loss
> Fig. 4: An illustration of the proposed Diffusion-SAC for offline UAV policy planning. A batch is sampled to compute the CQL loss, which is used to update the critic using the target actor and target critic networks. The critic produces Q-values that the actor uses to compute the Q-guidance loss. The policy (actor) is modeled as a diffusion model conditioned by the state to generate the action. The actor is updated using a weighted combination of the behavior cloning loss and the Q-guidance loss.

offline training [46]. Thus, the state and reward are normalized as follows: 

¯s = s − μs

σs + ε , (23) 

¯r = r − μr

σr + ε , (24) where μs and μr denote the means, σs and σr the standard deviations, and ε a small constant to avoid division by zero. This normalization ensures stable signal statistics for the learning process. 

B. Diffusion RL 

Diffusion models are used to model the policy (i.e., the actor) due to their flexible generative parameterization. This is particularly advantageous in offline RL. Following Section IV-C, the actor is defined as a conditional denoising diffusion model. Starting with noise aM ∼ N (0 , 1) ,the reverse process is applied as follows: 

ai−1|ai = ai

√αi − βi

pαi(1 − ¯αi) ϵθ (ai, i, s )+ pβiϵ, (25) for i = M, . . . , 1,

where ϵθ (ai, i, s ) is the denoising network, which generates denoising samples conditioned on the state s. We apply the sample rule with ϵ = 0 when i = 1 . This generative process serves as a stochastic signal reconstruction mechanism, trans-lating noisy policy samples into feasible UAV control actions. The actor loss in (16) can be replaced by a diffusion loss in (21) whose target is to reconstruct the action given the state. The actor loss can be re-formulated as follows: 

Lbc (θ) = Ei,ϵ, (s,a )∼D 



ϵ−ϵθ

√¯αia+p1− ¯αiϵ, i, s 

 2

,

(26) where Lbc is behavior cloning (BC) loss, which imitates the learning in the dataset. Training the actor with the BC loss alone merely copies the behavior policies in the dataset, without exploring new 

Algorithm 2: Diffusion-SAC for offline RL 

Input: Discount factor γ, conservative penalty constant α, Q-function learning rate ηQ, policy learning rate ηπ , number of training iterations J,denoising steps I and offline dataset D

Initialize: Actor parameters θ and critic parameters ϕ

for iteration j in {1,..., J} do for batch B in D do 

Sample a′0 using (25) Update the critic parameters using the loss in (15): ϕ ← ϕ − ηQ ∇ϕ Lcritic 

Sample a0 using (25) Update the actor parameters using the loss in (28): θ ← θ − ηπ ∇θ Lactor 

end end Return Optimized Q-function Qϕ(s, a ) and policy 

πθ (a|s)

policies that could outperform the known ones. To go beyond imitation, we introduce a Q-guidance loss [32]: 

Lg = −Es∼D ,a ∼πθ [Qϕ(s, a )] , (27) where Qϕ is the parameterized Q-function (critic) following (14) and (15) and a denotes the hybrid action sampled from the diffusion actor conditioned on s.Finally, the actor loss is computed as a weighted combina-tion of both BC loss and Q-function guidance loss: 

Lactor = η Lbc + (1 − η) Lg, (28) where η ∈ [0 , 1] is a hyperparameter that balances imitation and exploration. High η values approaching 1 would reduce RL to imitation learning, in which the actor imitates the samples seen in the dataset. In contrast, lower η values, approaching 0, eliminate the BC, which acts as a regularizer for the actor, and encourage exploration at the cost of stability. This balance parallels the bias-variance trade-off in adaptive signal estimation, thereby controlling generalization to unseen states. The critic is trained using the conventional CQL loss, similar to (15), while sampling the next action from the diffusion policy network, a′0 ∼ πθ′ . Setting the conservative parameter α = 0 yields the traditional Bellman update rule as in (14). This is beneficial when the weight of the BC loss is significant, mitigating the need for regularization. In contrast, large α values are needed to constrain the learned policies to be as close as possible to the behavioral policies when the BC loss weight is relatively small. We recall that deep RL requires the implementation of separate target networks for stability. Hence, we build a target actor and a target critic, which are updated separately and softly. Fig 4 summarizes the proposed training procedure of the proposed Diffusion-SAC. The original diffusion Q-learning work in [32] was devel-oped exclusively for continuous action spaces. In this work, we extend the framework to hybrid discrete-continuous control. Specifically, the action is represented as a single continuous 8

vector composed of two normalized displacement components and a one-hot encoding of the discrete scheduling decision. During diffusion training, the full hybrid vector is treated as a continuous signal and optimized using the standard DDPM noise-prediction objective. At inference time, the continuous components are rescaled to physical units, while the discrete segment is interpreted as logits and converted to a categorical action via softmax followed by argmax. The critic receives normalized continuous actions and one-hot discrete encodings, enabling consistent evaluation across both modalities. Since the diffusion actor does not provide an explicit likelihood, no entropy term is included; instead, stochasticity arises from the denoising sampling process. Algorithm 2 summarizes the proposed Diffusion-SAC for offline RL. VI. E XPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS 

In this section, we present the experimental analysis of the proposed approach. First, we describe the simulation setup, data collection, and pre-processing procedures. We then present extensive and diverse numerical results to validate the effectiveness of our method from both control and signal-processing perspectives. 

A. Simulation Setup 

We consider a UAV operating in a 1000 × 1000 square meters area, serving 10 randomly deployed sensors. The UAV flies at a fixed altitude of 100 meters with a constant velocity of 25 m/s. At the beginning of each episode, the UAV’s initial position is randomly initialized to ensure diverse spatial conditions and channel realizations. The state space comprises 13 elements: 2 elements representing the UAV’s 2D position, 10 elements representing the individual AoI (Age of Information) of each device, and 1 element representing the total energy consumption. The action space consists of 11 

possible discrete actions derived from device selection choices (including the idle/no-service case) and 2 continuous actions derived from the Cartesian movement directions. If a device is scheduled for service, it transmits a data packet of size 2 Mb to the UAV. The transmission time, AoI evolution, and energy consumption are functions of the achievable data rate, which is determined by the channel condition. Both the actor and critic networks consist of three hidden layers, each with 256 neurons. The Adam optimizer is employed to update network parameters, and training is performed using mini-batches of size 64 . All experiments are tested over 100 independent test environments with random-ized device layouts and propagation conditions. All reported performance curves correspond to the mean over these 100 environments. Simulations are implemented using PyTorch and executed on a single NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU. The complete list of simulation parameters used in the experiments is summarized in Table I. Our open-source code is available at https://github.com/Eslam211/Diffusion UAV. 

B. Baseline Methods and QoS Metrics 

First, we compare the proposed algorithm to conven-tional offline RL algorithms, such as conservative Q-learning                                                                           

> TABLE I: Simulation parameters and hyperparameters [13], [48], [49]
> Parameter Value Parameter Value
> Rc100 mvu=vmax 25 m/s
> h100 mfc2GHz
> C10 D0.6
> ξLoS 1dB ξNLoS 20 dB
> vl3×10 8m/s B1MHz
> N0−174 dBm / Hz Dk2Mb
> mtot 0.5Kg g9.807 m/s 2
> rp0.2mnp4
> ρ1.225 Kg / m 3Texec 0.02 s
> Pmax 5WPidle 0W
> Pcom 0.0126 WT=Amax 400
> λ0.5δk1
> K
> Ethreshold 3500 Jγ0.99
> Batch size 64 Optimizer Adam
> M50 Iterations J150

(CQL) [18], Batch-Constrained Deep Q-Learning (BCQ) [47], and implicit Q-learning (IQL) [19]. In addition, we perform an ablation study by adjusting the values of α and η in the proposed methods, i.e., changing the weights of CQL loss, behavior cloning loss, and Q-guidance loss in (15) and (28). We also include comparisons with heuristic-based trajectory and scheduling policies widely adopted in the literature [12]:  

> •

Time-division multiplexing (TDM): Devices are served in a round-robin manner at equal time intervals.  

> •

Saver: The UAV prioritizes serving the closest device to minimize energy usage.  

> •

Random-walk (RW): The UAV selects actions randomly. The quality-of-service (QoS) metrics include the set of achieved rewards, the average AoI, and the total energy consumption. In addition to these metrics, which are implicitly captured by the reward function, we also report the total throughput and the average packet transmission time, reflecting physical-layer and temporal efficiency. Together, these met-rics provide a comprehensive view of system performance from both communication and control standpoints. We further demonstrate the impact of the number of denoising steps, dataset size, and dataset quality on the convergence of the proposed algorithm. Additionally, we analyze the computa-tional complexity of the proposed model as we adjust the number of denoising steps, and compare these results with conventional offline RL algorithms to highlight the inherent trade-offs between efficiency and complexity in diffusion-based signal modeling. 

C. Data Collection and Online RL 

In the first experiment, illustrated in Fig. 5, we present the online training performance of an online SAC agent. The agent is trained over 700 episodes using both real-time inter-actions with the environment and sampled experiences from a replay buffer. As shown in the figure, the SAC agent exhibits steady convergence and significantly outperforms traditional baselines, including TDM, Saver, and RW. As the cumulative reward increases, both the average AoI and the total energy consumption decrease, indicating improved communication efficiency and signal freshness through adaptive trajectory and scheduling control. This result demonstrates the potential 9Episodes Return Online SAC TDM Saver RW                    

> (a) Return Episodes Energy (kJ) Online SAC TDM Saver RW (b) AoI Episodes AoI (s) Online SAC TDM Saver RW (c) Energy Fig. 5: Performance of online SAC compared to the heuristic baselines in terms of: (a) normalised return, (b) average AoI, and (c) energy consumption. Epochs Return = 0, = 0.5 = 0, = 0 = 0, = 1 = 1, = 0 = 1, = 0.5
> (a) Return Epochs AoI (s) = 0, = 0.5 = 0, = 0 = 0, = 1 = 1, = 0 = 1, = 0.5 (b) AoI Epochs Energy (kJ) = 0, = 0.5 = 0, = 0 = 0, = 1 = 1, = 0 = 1, = 0.5 (c) Energy Fig. 6: Performance of different variants of the proposed algorithm in terms of: (a) normalised return, (b) average AoI, and (c) energy consumption.

of learning-based methods to optimize UAV-assisted data-collection systems by reducing communication latency and energy expenditure. Despite its strong performance, online RL methods face critical limitations, particularly in safety-critical and resource-constrained environments. The need for extensive online ex-ploration can be costly, risky, and impractical in real-world UAV deployments. Such exploration can also distort the signal environment or violate QoS constraints, limiting real-time applicability. To address this, we turn to offline RL techniques, which eliminate the need for live interactions during training by leveraging pre-collected datasets. To construct the offline dataset, we use the replay buffer collected during online SAC training. Data gathered in the early stages of training are generally of lower quality, re-flecting suboptimal decisions and exploratory behavior. In contrast, data collected in later stages correspond to more refined, near-optimal policies. This variation in data quality plays an important role in shaping the learning dynamics and final performance of the offline RL algorithms evalu-ated in subsequent experiments. The final dataset contains approximately 30 k transition tuples sampled uniformly across the entire training horizon, thereby incorporating both early exploratory trajectories and later near-optimal behaviors. This mixture promotes diverse state-action coverage rather than restricting the dataset to a single deterministic behavior policy. 

D. Numerical Results 

In the next experiment presented in Fig. 6, we evaluate the performance of the proposed Diffusion-SAC algorithm under varying configurations of the loss function parameters introduced in (15) and (28). Specifically, we analyze the impact of different combinations of the CQL loss weight ( α)and the actor loss weighting parameter ( η), which balances the BC and Q-guidance terms. Fig. 6a depicts the average normalized return for each configuration. Setting α = 0

effectively disables the CQL loss, while adjusting η modifies the influence of BC and Q-guidance losses. For instance, η = 0 

corresponds to a pure Q-guidance objective (no BC), whereas 

η = 1 removes the Q-guidance term entirely, reducing the actor loss to standard behavior cloning. Among the tested variants, the configuration with α = 0 

and η = 0 .5, i.e. , removing the CQL loss while maintaining a balance between BC and Q-guidance, yields the highest return. This suggests that behavior cloning serves as a sufficient constraint on OOD actions, effectively mitigating distribu-tional shift without the conservatism introduced by CQL. Interestingly, even when both CQL and BC losses are omitted (i.e. , α = 0 , η = 0 ), the model still achieves competitive performance, demonstrating the ability of diffusion models to implicitly learn structured signal representations and policy dynamics through Q-guidance alone. In contrast, including the CQL loss ( α = 1 ) tends to over-constrain the policy, regardless of whether BC is present, leading to convergence to sub-optimal solutions. This overcon-10 Epochs            

> Return
> = 0, = 0.5
> IQL
> CQL
> BCQ
> TDM
> Saver
> RW
> (a) Return Epochs AoI (s) = 0, = 0.5 IQL CQL BCQ TDM Saver RW (b) AoI Epochs Energy (kJ) = 0, = 0.5 IQL CQL BCQ TDM Saver RW (c) Energy Fig. 7: Performance of the proposed algorithm compared to other offline baselines in terms of: (a) normalised return, (b) average AoI, and (c) energy consumption. Dataset size ( 1000) Return = 0, = 0.5 IQL CQL BCQ
> (a) Dataset size Epochs Return = 0, = 0.5 IQL CQL BCQ (b) Good dataset Epochs
> Return
> = 0, = 0.5
> IQL
> CQL
> BCQ (c) Bad dataset Fig. 8: An illustration of the effect of the dataset size and dataset quality on the proposed algorithm compared to the baselines.

servatism limits the model’s capacity to generalize or improve upon the dataset’s behavior. The case where α = 0 and η = 1 ,which removes both CQL and Q-guidance losses, effectively reduces the learning to pure imitation. While this setup may perform adequately on high-quality datasets, it is less robust when the dataset includes suboptimal or noisy trajectories. Finally, Figs.6b and6c validate these findings by showing that the Diffusion-SAC configuration with α = 0 and η = 0 .5 also achieves superior performance in minimizing both AoI and energy consumption, confirming its effectiveness in optimizing multi-objective UAV communication tasks. In the experiments presented in Fig. 7, we compare the performance of the proposed Diffusion-SAC algorithm against several state-of-the-art offline RL baselines. For clarity and conciseness, we include only the best-performing configura-tion of Diffusion-SAC ( i.e. , α = 0 and η = 0 .5) as established in previous experiments. A high-quality offline dataset of 30 ksamples, collected to ensure broad coverage of the state-action space, is used for training all algorithms. As illustrated in Fig. 7a, the BCQ algorithm yields the lowest average return, indicating its limited ability to gen-eralize from the dataset in this environment. Both IQL and CQL perform comparably, achieving relatively high and stable returns, yet falling short of the optimal policy. In contrast, the proposed Diffusion-SAC consistently achieves the highest return, indicating its superior capacity to leverage the dataset while avoiding over-conservatism or poor generalization. This trend is further corroborated in Fig.7b, where Diffusion-SAC achieves the lowest average AoI, slightly out-performing both CQL and IQL. Moreover, as shown in Fig.7c, it also results in the lowest energy consumption among all methods. These results collectively highlight the effectiveness of Diffusion-SAC in optimizing both communication freshness (AoI) and energy efficiency, which are two critical metrics in UAV-assisted data collection, while also surpassing existing offline RL methods in overall performance. The weighting parameter λ controls the trade-off between AoI and energy; varying λ shifts this balance but does not alter the relative superiority of Diffusion-SAC over baseline methods. In this set of experiments, we investigate the impact of dataset size and quality on the performance of the proposed algorithm relative to standard offline RL baselines. Fig. 8a illustrates the effect of varying dataset sizes on policy per-formance. The proposed method, specifically Diffusion-SAC with α = 0 and η = 0 .5, demonstrates remarkable robustness to dataset size. Notably, its performance with just 10 k data samples remains nearly identical to that with 50 k samples, indicating efficient policy learning even from relatively small datasets. In contrast, the baseline algorithms, including IQL, CQL, and BCQ, exhibit significant performance degradation when trained on smaller datasets, highlighting their sensitivity to data volume. A similar trend is observed when evaluating the effect of dataset quality, as depicted in Fig.8b and Fig.8c. When 11 = 0, = 0.5  

> IQL
> CQL
> BCQ
> (a) Transmission time Epochs
> Total transmitted data (GB)
> = 0, = 0.5
> IQL
> CQL
> BCQ
> (b) Total data Fig. 9: The performance of the proposed algorithm compared to the baselines in terms of the transmission rate: (a) Average transmission time of one packet and (b) Total transmitted data in one episode.

trained on a poor-quality dataset (containing mostly sub-optimal or random behaviors), CQL demonstrates relatively strong performance due to its conservative nature. However, it fails to effectively exploit high-quality datasets, often con-verging to overly cautious policies. On the other hand, BCQ performs better when the dataset consists predominantly of high-quality trajectories but struggles significantly with noisy or sub-optimal data. IQL shows more balanced behavior across varying dataset qualities, but still underperforms the optimal policies. The robustness of Diffusion-SAC under reduced dataset size and varying data quality indicates that the learned policy does not merely memorize trajectories but generalizes beyond the dataset. Its stable performance under small or mixed-quality datasets suggests improved resilience to distributional shift compared to conventional offline RL baselines. In Fig.9a, we present the average transmission time required for a device to send a packet to the UAV successfully. This transmission time is primarily determined by the achievable transmission rate, which in turn depends on the SNR and the UAV’s relative position to the transmitter. The proposed Diffusion-SAC algorithm achieves an average transmission time of approximately 0.15 seconds, outperforming all base-line methods. This improvement in transmission efficiency is further re-flected in Fig.9b, which shows the total data collected by the UAV over a single episode. The proposed algorithm enables the UAV to collect over 0.65 GB of data, representing a 35% 

increase in throughput compared to baseline algorithms. These Denoising steps  

> Return
> = 0, = 0.5
> IQL
> CQL
> BCQ
> (a) Return M = 50 M = 20 M = 10 M = 5 M = 2 M = 1 IQL CQL BCQ
> Models
> 0510 15 20 25 30 35
> Inference time (ms)
> (b) Inference Time Fig. 10: The return and inference time of the proposed algorithm while changing the number of denoising steps compared to the baselines.

results underscore the multifaceted benefits of the proposed approach. In addition to effectively minimizing AoI and energy consumption, the Diffusion-SAC also enhances communi-cation efficiency by implicitly maximizing data throughput, thereby demonstrating its overall superiority in optimizing UAV-assisted data collection tasks. Finally, we analyze the impact of the number of denoising steps on the performance of the proposed Diffusion-SAC algorithm, as shown in Fig. 10a. The results indicate that in-creasing the number of denoising steps improves convergence, as measured by accumulated rewards. Specifically, a small number of denoising steps (fewer than 10 ) yields suboptimal performance, failing to surpass the returns achieved by the baseline algorithms. In contrast, employing more than 20 

denoising steps consistently enables the model to reach near-optimal policies, thereby outperforming all baselines. To further understand the trade-off, we evaluate the in-ference time of the proposed method as a function of the number of denoising steps and compare it with the baselines, as shown in Fig. 10b. Since all algorithms utilize the same underlying neural network architecture, the baselines, namely IQL, CQL, and BCQ, achieve minimal inference times of approximately 2 milliseconds. However, in Diffusion-SAC, inference time scales linearly with the number of denoising steps. For instance, achieving optimal performance with more than 20 denoising steps incurs an inference delay of around 

12 milliseconds. Although Diffusion-SAC introduces a moderate increase in inference time, this additional computational cost is justified by its significant gains in core signal-processing performance 12 

metrics, including reduced transmission delay, improved en-ergy efficiency, and overall system throughput. From a real-world system perspective, this represents a favorable trade-off between complexity and performance, where over prolonged operation, the benefits in latency reduction and extended device lifetime outweigh the overhead, yielding more reliable, energy-aware signal control in UAV networks. hile Diffusion-SAC demonstrates consistent performance across randomized environments, performance may degrade when the offline dataset is severely biased or when the number of denoising steps is too small, as illustrated in the numerical results. In such cases, the policy may converge toward conservative or imitation-like behavior. This highlights the importance of sufficient dataset diversity and adequate diffusion depth. VII. C ONCLUSIONS 

We developed a Diffusion-SAC algorithm for offline RL. By integrating the generative denoising capabilities of diffusion models with the robust estimation of the CQL algorithm, the proposed framework enables efficient and safe offline policy optimization. The diffusion-based actor models express policy distributions that enhance generalization beyond the dataset behavior while maintaining stability through conser-vative regularization. We compared different variants of the proposed algorithm by varying the weights of the CQL loss, behavior-cloning loss, and Q-guidance loss, which control the trade-off among imitation, exploration, and conservatism. This analysis identified stable signal-processing operating points that balance data fidelity and decision adaptivity. The proposed method was evaluated in a UAV-assisted wireless network scenario, aiming to jointly minimize AoI and energy consumption while ensuring fairness among devices via weighted AoI optimization. Compared to state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms, including CQL, IQL, and BCQ, the proposed Diffusion-SAC algorithm consistently outperforms all baselines, achieving over 35% higher throughput while minimizing both AoI and total energy consumption. Further-more, it exhibits stronger resilience to variations in dataset size and quality, demonstrating robust signal generalization under data limitations. Finally, future work will focus on reducing time complexity and inference latency by minimizing the number of denoising steps using advanced diffusion acceleration techniques, such as the denoising diffusion implicit model (DDIM) [50]. Ex-tending this framework to multi-agent and distributed signal processing scenarios in next-generation wireless networks also represents a promising direction for future research. REFERENCES [1] Y. Liu, H. Du, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. I. Kim, and A. Jamalipour, “Deep generative model and its applications in efficient wireless network management: A tutorial and case study,” IEEE Wireless Communications , vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 199–207, 2024. [2] H. Farhadi, B. Banerjee, R. Berkvens, N. N. Bhat, E. Bodji, D. Dampa-halage, E. Eldeeb, J. Famaey, G. P. Fettweis, J. Jeong, D. Korpi, S. Kumar, Y. Lebrun, R. Legouable, J. M. Mateos-Ramos, N. H. Mahmood, M. H. Moghaddam, A. Nimr, N. Rajatheva, N. Rajapaksha, A. Stavridis, T. Svensson, H. Yu, L. Wilhelmsson, and H. Wymeersch, “6G AI-driven air interface - Hexa-X-II view,” IEEE Communications Magazine , vol. 63, no. 10, pp. 118–125, 2025. [3] E. Balevi, A. Doshi, A. Jalal, A. Dimakis, and J. G. Andrews, “High dimensional channel estimation using deep generative networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 18–30, 2021. [4] A. Celik and A. M. Eltawil, “At the dawn of generative AI era: A tutorial-cum-survey on new frontiers in 6G wireless intelligence,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society , vol. 5, pp. 2433–2489, 2024. [5] Z. Tao, W. Xu, Y. Huang, X. Wang, and X. You, “Wireless network digital twin for 6G: Generative AI as a key enabler,” IEEE Wireless Communications , vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 24–31, 2024. [6] X. Wang, J. Li, J. Wu, L. Guo, and Z. Ning, “Energy efficiency optimization of IRS and UAV-assisted wireless powered edge networks,” 

IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing , 2024. [7] Y. Cao, Q. Z. Sheng, J. McAuley, and L. Yao, “Reinforcement learning for generative AI: A survey,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.14328 [8] H. Du, R. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Lin, Z. Li, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, S. Cui, B. Ai, H. Zhou, and D. I. Kim, “Enhancing deep reinforcement learning: A tutorial on generative diffusion models in network optimization,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials ,vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 2611–2646, 2024. [9] Y. Xia, J. Du, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Xu, and W. Mi, “Standoff target tracking for networked UAVs with specified performance via deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing , 2024. [10] P. Li and J. Xu, “Fundamental rate limits of UAV-enabled multiple access channel with trajectory optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 458–474, 2020. [11] J. Xie, Z. Chang, X. Guo, and T. H¨ am¨ al¨ ainen, “Energy efficient resource allocation for wireless powered UAV wireless communication system with short packet,” IEEE Transactions on Green Communications and Networking , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 101–113, 2023. [12] E. Eldeeb, J. M. de Souza Sant’Ana, D. E. P´ erez, M. Shehab, N. H. Mahmood, and H. Alves, “Multi-UAV path learning for age and power optimization in IoT with UAV battery recharge,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 5356–5360, 2022. [13] B. Zhu, E. Bedeer, H. H. Nguyen, R. Barton, and J. Henry, “UAV trajectory planning in wireless sensor networks for energy consumption minimization by deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 9540–9554, 2021. [14] R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto et al. , “Reinforcement learning,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 126–134, 1999. [15] S. Levine, A. Kumar, G. Tucker, and J. Fu, “Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial, review, and perspectives on open problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643 , 2020. [16] E. Eldeeb, H. Sifaou, O. Simeone, M. Shehab, and H. Alves, “Conser-vative and risk-aware offline multi-agent reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1913–1926, 2025. [17] E. Eldeeb and H. Alves, “Offline and distributional reinforcement learn-ing for wireless communications,” IEEE Communications Magazine ,vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 71–76, 2025. [18] A. Kumar, A. Zhou, G. Tucker, and S. Levine, “Conservative Q-learning for offline reinforcement learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 1179–1191. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2020/file/0d2b2061826a5df3221116a5085a6052-Paper.pdf [19] I. Kostrikov, A. Nair, and S. Levine, “Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-learning,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2110.06169 [20] X. Huang, X. Liu, E. Zhang, T. Yu, and S. Li, “Offline-to-online reinforcement learning with classifier-free diffusion generation,” in 

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , Vancouver, Canada, 2025, iCML 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.06806 [21] S. Zhao, W. Jing, F. R. Yu, X. Wen, and Z. Lu, “Mobility-aware computation offloading for AR tasks over terahertz wireless networks: An offline reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 73, no. 12, pp. 19 111–19 124, 2024. [22] K. Yang, C. Shi, C. Shen, J. Yang, S.-P. Yeh, and J. J. Sydir, “Offline reinforcement learning for wireless network optimization with mixture datasets,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 12 703–12 716, 2024. [23] E. Eldeeb and H. Alves, “Resilient UAV trajectory planning via few-shot meta-offline reinforcement learning,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01268 13 

[24] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli, “Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” in Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 37. Lille, France: PMLR, 07–09 Jul 2015, pp. 2256–2265. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/sohl-dickstein15.html [25] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 6840–6851. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/ 2020/file/4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Paper.pdf [26] T. Wu, Z. Chen, D. He, L. Qian, Y. Xu, M. Tao, and W. Zhang, “CDDM: Channel denoising diffusion models for wireless semantic communica-tions,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 11 168–11 183, 2024. [27] J. Pei, C. Feng, P. Wang, H. Tabassum, and D. Shi, “Latent diffusion model-enabled low-latency semantic communication in the presence of semantic ambiguities and wireless channel noises,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 4055–4072, 2025. [28] U. Sengupta, C. Jao, A. Bernacchia, S. Vakili, and D.-s. Shiu, “Gen-erative diffusion models for radio wireless channel modelling and sampling,” in GLOBECOM 2023 - 2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference , 2023, pp. 4779–4784. [29] L. Qiao, M. B. Mashhadi, Z. Gao, C. H. Foh, P. Xiao, and M. Bennis, “Latency-aware generative semantic communications with pre-trained diffusion models,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters , vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 2652–2656, 2024. [30] K. Wang, B. Yang, Z. Yu, X. Cao, M. Debbah, and C. Yuen, “Optimization for massive 3d-ris deployment: A generative diffusion model-based approach,” arXiv preprint , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.11969 [31] N. C. Luong, N. D. Hai, D. V. Le, H. T. Nguyen, T. Vu, T. Huynh-The, R. Zhang, N. D. D. Anh, D. Niyato, M. D. Renzo, D. I. Kim, and Q. Pham, “Diffusion models for future networks and communications: A comprehensive survey,” arXiv preprint , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.01586 [32] Z. Wang, J. J. Hunt, and M. Zhou, “Diffusion policies as an expressive policy class for offline reinforcement learning,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06193 [33] H. Du, Z. Li, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, H. Huang, and S. Mao, “Diffusion-based reinforcement learning for edge-enabled AI-generated content services,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 8902–8918, 2024. [34] Z. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Chen, H. Fu, Z. Tong, and C. Jiang, “Diffusion-based reinforcement learning for cooperative offloading and resource allocation in multi-UAV assisted edge-enabled metaverse,” IEEE Trans-actions on Vehicular Technology , pp. 1–13, 2025. [35] S. Xiong, S. He, G. Chen, C. Zhang, and Y. Huang, “Diffusion model and digital twin enhanced deep reinforcement learning for radio resource management in RAN slicing,” in 2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) , 2025, pp. 1–6. [36] S. Nouri, M. K. Motalleb, and V. Shah-Mansouri, “Diffusion-rl for scalable resource allocation for 6g networks,” arXiv preprint , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07880 [37] J. Yao and N. Ansari, “QoS-aware power control in internet of drones for data collection service,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology ,vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 6649–6656, 2019. [38] B. Zhu, E. Bedeer, H. H. Nguyen, R. Barton, and Z. Gao, “UAV trajectory planning for AoI-minimal data collection in UAV-aided IoT networks by transformer,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communica-tions , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1343–1358, 2023. [39] M. B. Ghorbel, D. Rodr ˜ Aguez-Duarte, H. Ghazzai, M. J. Hossain, and H. Menouar, “Joint position and travel path optimization for energy efficient wireless data gathering using unmanned aerial vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 2165–2175, 2019. [40] A. Kosta, N. Pappas, V. Angelakis et al. , “Age of information: A new concept, metric, and tool,” Foundations and Trends® in Networking ,vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 162–259, 2017. [41] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, S. Petersen, C. Beattie, A. Sadik, I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Kumaran, D. Wierstra, S. Legg, and D. Hassabis, “Human-level control through deep reinforce-ment learning,” Nature , vol. 518, pp. 529–33, 02 2015. [42] R. Agarwal, D. Schuurmans, and M. Norouzi, “An optimistic perspective on offline reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 119. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020, pp. 104–114. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/ agarwal20c.html [43] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with astochastic actor,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 80. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018, pp. 1861–1870. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/haarnoja18b.html [44] V. Konda and J. Tsitsiklis, “Actor-critic algorithms,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 12. MIT Press, 1999. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/ paper/1999/file/6449f44a102fde848669bdd9eb6b76fa-Paper.pdf [45] A. Q. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, “Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 139. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021, pp. 8162–8171. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/nichol21a.html [46] K. Cobbe, O. Klimov, C. Hesse, T. Kim, and J. Schulman, “Quantifying generalization in reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 97. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019, pp. 1282–1289. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ cobbe19a.html [47] S. Fujimoto, D. Meger, and D. Precup, “Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without exploration,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/1812.02900 [48] M. B. Ghorbel, D. Rodriguez-Duarte, H. Ghazzai, M. J. Hossain, and H. Menouar, “Joint position and travel path optimization for energy efficient wireless data gathering using unmanned aerial vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 2165–2175, 2019. [49] H. Ghazzai, M. B. Ghorbel, A. Kadri, M. J. Hossain, and H. Menouar, “Energy-efficient management of unmanned aerial vehicles for underlay cognitive radio systems,” IEEE Transactions on Green Communications and Networking , vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 434–443, 2017. [50] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit models,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502